POIROT INVESTIGATES




  POIROT INVESTIGATES


  I


  The Adventure of “The Western Star”

I was standing at the window of Poirot’s rooms looking out idly on
the street below.

“That’s queer,” I ejaculated suddenly beneath my breath.

“What is, _mon ami_?” asked Poirot placidly, from the depths of
his comfortable chair.

“Deduce, Poirot, from the following facts! Here is a young lady,
richly dressed—fashionable hat, magnificent furs. She is coming
along slowly, looking up at the houses as she goes. Unknown to her,
she is being shadowed by three men and a middle-aged woman. They
have just been joined by an errand boy who points after the girl,
gesticulating as he does so. What drama is this being played? Is
the girl a crook, and are the shadowers detectives preparing to
arrest her? Or are _they_ the scoundrels, and are they plotting to
attack an innocent victim? What does the great detective say?”

“The great detective, _mon ami_, chooses, as ever, the simplest
course. He rises to see for himself.” And my friend joined me at
the window.

In a minute he gave vent to an amused chuckle.

“As usual, your facts are tinged with your incurable romanticism.
That is Miss Mary Marvell, the film star. She is being followed by
a bevy of admirers who have recognized her. And, _en passant_, my
dear Hastings, she is quite aware of the fact!”

I laughed.

“So all is explained! But you get no marks for that, Poirot. It
was a mere matter of recognition.”

“_En vérité!_ And how many times have you seen Mary Marvell on the
screen, _mon cher_?”

I thought.

“About a dozen times perhaps.”

“And I—once! Yet _I_ recognize her, and _you_ do not.”

“She looks so different,” I replied rather feebly.

“Ah! _Sacré_!” cried Poirot. “Is it that you expect her to promenade
herself in the streets of London in a cowboy hat, or with bare
feet, and a bunch of curls, as an Irish colleen? Always with you
it is the non-essentials! Remember the case of the dancer, Valerie
Saintclair.”

I shrugged my shoulders, slightly annoyed.

“But console yourself, _mon ami_,” said Poirot, calming down. “All
cannot be as Hercule Poirot! I know it well.”

“You really have the best opinion of yourself of anyone I ever
knew!” I cried, divided between amusement and annoyance.

“What will you? When one is unique, one knows it! And others share
that opinion—even, if I mistake not, Miss Mary Marvell.”

“What?”

“Without doubt. She is coming here.”

“How do you make that out?”

“Very simply. This street, it is not aristocratic, _mon ami_! In
it there is no fashionable doctor, no fashionable dentist—still
less is there a fashionable milliner! But there _is_ a fashionable
detective. _Oui_, my friend, it is true—I am become the mode, the
_dernier cri_! One says to another: ‘_Comment?_ You have lost your
gold pencil-case? You must go to the little Belgian. He is too
marvellous! Every one goes! _Courez!’_ And they arrive! In flocks,
_mon ami_! With problems of the most foolish!” A bell rang below.
“What did I tell you? That is Miss Marvell.”

As usual, Poirot was right. After a short interval, the American
film star was ushered in, and we rose to our feet.

Mary Marvell was undoubtedly one of the most popular actresses on
the screen. She had only lately arrived in England in company with
her husband, Gregory B. Rolf, also a film actor. Their marriage
had taken place about a year ago in the States and this was their
first visit to England. They had been given a great reception.
Every one was prepared to go mad over Mary Marvell, her wonderful
clothes, her furs, her jewels, above all one jewel, the great
diamond which had been nicknamed, to match its owner, “the Western
Star.” Much, true and untrue, had been written about this famous
stone which was reported to be insured for the enormous sum of
fifty thousand pounds.

All these details passed rapidly through my mind as I joined with
Poirot in greeting our fair client.

Miss Marvell was small and slender, very fair and girlish-looking,
with the wide innocent blue eyes of a child.

Poirot drew forward a chair for her, and she commenced talking at
once.

“You will probably think me very foolish, Monsieur Poirot, but Lord
Cronshaw was telling me last night how wonderfully you cleared up
the mystery of his nephew’s death, and I felt that I just must have
your advice. I dare say it’s only a silly hoax—Gregory says so—but
it’s just worrying me to death.”

She paused for breath. Poirot beamed encouragement.

“Proceed, Madame. You comprehend, I am still in the dark.”

“It’s these letters.” Miss Marvell unclasped her handbag, and drew
out three envelopes which she handed to Poirot.

The latter scrutinized them closely.

“Cheap paper—the name and address carefully printed. Let us see
the inside.” He drew out the enclosure.

I had joined him, and was leaning over his shoulder. The writing
consisted of a single sentence, carefully printed like the envelope.
It ran as follows:

“The great diamond which is the left eye of the god must return
whence it came.”

The second letter was couched in precisely the same terms, but the
third was more explicit:

“You have been warned. You have not obeyed. Now the diamond will
be taken from you. At the full of the moon, the two diamonds which
are the left and right eye of the god shall return. So it is
written.”

“The first letter I treated as a joke,” explained Miss Marvell.
“When I got the second, I began to wonder. The third one came
yesterday, and it seemed to me that, after all, the matter might
be more serious than I had imagined.”

“I see they did not come by post, these letters.”

“No; they were left by hand—by a _Chinaman._ That is what frightens
me.”

“Why?”

“Because it was from a Chink in San Francisco that Gregory bought
the stone three years ago.”

“I see, madame, that you believe the diamond referred to to be——”

“‘The Western Star,’” finished Miss Marvell. “That’s so. At the
time, Gregory remembers that there was some story attached to the
stone, but the Chink wasn’t handing out any information. Gregory
says he seemed just scared to death, and in a mortal hurry to get
rid of the thing. He only asked about a tenth of its value. It was
Greg’s wedding present to me.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“The story seems of an almost unbelievable romanticism. And yet—who
knows? I pray of you, Hastings, hand me my little almanac.”

I complied.

“_Voyons!_” said Poirot, turning the leaves.

“When is the date of the full moon? Ah, Friday next. That is in
three days’ time. _Eh bien_, madame, you seek my advice—I give it
to you. This _belle histoire_ may be a hoax—but it may not!
Therefore I counsel you to place the diamond in my keeping until
after Friday next. Then we can take what steps we please.”

A slight cloud passed over the actress’s face, and she replied
constrainedly:

“I’m afraid that’s impossible.”

“You have it with you—_hein_?” Poirot was watching her narrowly.

The girl hesitated a moment, then slipped her hand into the bosom
of her gown, drawing out a long thin chain. She leaned forward,
unclosing her hand. In the palm, a stone of white fire, exquisitely
set in platinum, lay and winked at us solemnly.

Poirot drew in his breath with a long hiss.

“_Épatant!_” he murmured. “You permit, madame?” He took the jewel
in his own hand and scrutinized it keenly, then restored it to her
with a little bow. “A magnificent stone—without a flaw. Ah, _cent
tonnerres!_ and you carry it about with you, _comme ça_!”

“No, no, I’m very careful really, Monsieur Poirot. As a rule it’s
locked up in my jewel-case, and left in the hotel safe deposit.
We’re staying at the _Magnificent_, you know. I just brought it
along to-day for you to see.”

“And you will leave it with me, _n’est-ce pas_? You will be advised
by Papa Poirot?”

“Well, you see, it’s this way, Monsieur Poirot. On Friday we’re
going down to Yardly Chase to spend a few days with Lord and Lady
Yardly.”

Her words awoke a vague echo of remembrance in my mind. Some
gossip—what was it now? A few years ago Lord and Lady Yardly had
paid a visit to the States, rumour had it that his lordship had
rather gone the pace out there with the assistance of some lady
friends—but surely there was something more, some gossip which
coupled Lady Yardly’s name with that of a “movie” star in
California—why! it came to me in a flash—of course it was none
other than Gregory B. Rolf.

“I’ll let you into a little secret, Monsieur Poirot,” Miss Marvell
was continuing. “We’ve got a deal on with Lord Yardly. There’s some
chance of our arranging to film a play down there in his ancestral
pile.”

“At Yardly Chase?” I cried, interested. “Why, it’s one of the show
places of England.”

Miss Marvell nodded.

“I guess it’s the real old feudal stuff all right. But he wants a
pretty stiff price, and of course I don’t know yet whether the deal
will go through, but Greg and I always like to combine business
with pleasure.”

“But—I demand pardon if I am dense, madame—surely it is possible
to visit Yardly Chase without taking the diamond with you?”

A shrewd, hard look came into Miss Marvell’s eyes which belied
their childlike appearance. She looked suddenly a good deal older.

“I want to wear it down there.”

“Surely” I said suddenly, “there are some very famous jewels in
the Yardly collection, a large diamond amongst them?”

“That’s so,” said Miss Marvell briefly.

I heard Poirot murmur beneath his breath: “Ah, _c’est comme ça_!”
Then he said aloud, with his usual uncanny luck in hitting the
bull’s-eye (he dignifies it by the name of psychology): “Then you
are without doubt already acquainted with Lady Yardly, or perhaps
your husband is?”

“Gregory knew her when she was out West three years ago,” said Miss
Marvell. She hesitated a moment, and then added abruptly: “Do
either of you ever see _Society Gossip_?”

We both pleaded guilty rather shamefacedly.

“I ask because in this week’s number there is an article on famous
jewels, and it’s really very curious——” She broke off.

I rose, went to the table at the other side of the room and returned
with the paper in question in my hand. She took it from me, found
the article, and began to read aloud:

“. . . Amongst other famous stones may be included the Star of the
East, a diamond in the possession of the Yardly family. An ancestor
of the present Lord Yardly brought it back with him from China,
and a romantic story is said to attach to it. According to this,
the stone was once the right eye of a temple god. Another diamond,
exactly similar in form and size, formed the left eye, and the
story goes that this jewel, too, would in course of time be stolen.
‘One eye shall go West, the other East, till they shall meet once
more. Then, in triumph shall they return to the god.’ It is a
curious coincidence that there is at the present time a stone
corresponding closely in description with this one, and known as
‘the Star of the West,’ or ‘the Western Star.’ It is the property
of the celebrated film actress, Miss Mary Marvell. A comparison of
the two stones would be interesting.”

She stopped.

“_Épatant!_” murmured Poirot. “Without doubt a romance of the first
water.” He turned to Mary Marvell. “And you are not afraid, madame?
You have no superstitious terrors? You do not fear to introduce
these two Siamese twins to each other lest a Chinaman should appear
and, hey presto! whisk them both back to China?”

His tone was mocking, but I fancied that an undercurrent of
seriousness lay beneath it.

“I don’t believe that Lady Yardly’s diamond is anything like as
good a stone as mine,” said Miss Marvell. “Anyway, I’m going to
see.”

What more Poirot would have said I do not know, for at that moment
the door flew open, and a splendid-looking man strode into the
room. From his crisply curling black head, to the tips of his
patent-leather boots, he was a hero fit for romance.

“I said I’d call round for you, Mary,” said Gregory Rolf, “and here
I am. Well, what does Monsieur Poirot say to our little problem?
Just one big hoax, same as I do?”

Poirot smiled up at the big actor. They made a ridiculous contrast.

“Hoax or no hoax, Mr. Rolf,” he said dryly, “I have advised Madame
your wife not to take the jewel with her to Yardly Chase on Friday.”

“I’m with you there, sir. I’ve already said so to Mary. But there!
She’s a woman through and through, and I guess she can’t bear to
think of another woman outshining her in the jewel line.”

“What nonsense, Gregory!” said Mary Marvell sharply. But she
flushed angrily.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“Madame, I have advised. I can do no more. _C’est fini_.”

He bowed them both to the door.

“Ah! _la la_,” he observed, returning. “_Histoire de femmes!_ The
good husband, he hit the nail on the head—_tout de même_, he was
not tactful! Assuredly not.”

I imparted to him my vague remembrances, and he nodded vigorously.

“So I thought. All the same, there is something curious underneath
all this. With your permission, _mon ami_, I will take the air.
Await my return, I beg of you. I shall not be long.”

I was half asleep in my chair when the landlady tapped on the door,
and put her head in.

“It’s another lady to see Mr. Poirot, sir. I’ve told her he was
out, but she says as how she’ll wait, seeing as she’s come up from
the country.”

“Oh, show her in here, Mrs. Murchison. Perhaps I can do something
for her.”

In another moment the lady had been ushered in. My heart gave a
leap as I recognized her. Lady Yardly’s portrait had figured too
often in the Society papers to allow her to remain unknown.

“Do sit down, Lady Yardly,” I said, drawing forward a chair. “My
friend Poirot is out, but I know for a fact that he’ll be back very
shortly.”

She thanked me and sat down. A very different type, this, from Miss
Mary Marvell. Tall, dark, with flashing eyes, and a pale proud
face—yet something wistful in the curves of the mouth.

I felt a desire to rise to the occasion. Why not? In Poirot’s
presence I have frequently felt a difficulty—I do not appear at my
best. And yet there is no doubt that I, too, possess the deductive
sense in a marked degree. I leant forward on a sudden impulse.

“Lady Yardly,” I said, “I know why you have come here. You have
received blackmailing letters about the diamond.”

There was no doubt as to my bolt having shot home. She stared at
me open-mouthed, all colour banished from her cheeks.

“You know?” she gasped. “How?”

I smiled.

“By a perfectly logical process. If Miss Marvell has had warning
letters——”

“Miss Marvell? She has been here?”

“She has just left. As I was saying, if she, as the holder of one
of the twin diamonds, has received a mysterious series of warnings,
you, as the holder of the other stone, must necessarily have done
the same. You see how simple it is? I am right, then, you have
received these strange communications also?”

For a moment she hesitated, as though in doubt whether to trust me
or not, then she bowed her head in assent with a little smile.

“That is so,” she acknowledged.

“Were yours, too, left by hand—by a Chinaman?”

“No, they came by post; but, tell me, has Miss Marvell undergone
the same experience, then?”

I recounted to her the events of the morning. She listened
attentively.

“It all fits in. My letters are the duplicates of hers. It is true
that they came by post, but there is a curious perfume impregnating
them—something in the nature of joss-stick—that at once suggested
the East to me. What does it all mean?”

I shook my head.

“That is what we must find out. You have the letters with you? We
might learn something from the postmarks.”

“Unfortunately I destroyed them. You understand, at the time I
regarded it as some foolish joke. Can it be true that some Chinese
gang are really trying to recover the diamonds? It seems too
incredible.”

We went over the facts again and again, but could get no further
towards the elucidation of the mystery. At last Lady Yardly rose.

“I really don’t think I need wait for Monsieur Poirot. You can tell
him all this, can’t you? Thank you so much, Mr.——”

She hesitated, her hand outstretched.

“Captain Hastings.”

“Of course! How stupid of me. You’re a friend of the Cavendishes,
aren’t you? It was Mary Cavendish who sent me to Monsieur Poirot.”

When my friend returned, I enjoyed telling him the tale of what
had occurred during his absence. He cross-questioned me rather
sharply over the details of our conversation and I could read
between the lines that he was not best pleased to have been absent.
I also fancied that the dear old fellow was just the least inclined
to be jealous. It had become rather a pose with him to consistently
belittle my abilities, and I think he was chagrined at finding no
loophole for criticism. I was secretly rather pleased with myself,
though I tried to conceal the fact for fear of irritating him. In
spite of his idiosyncrasies, I was deeply attached to my quaint
little friend.

“_Bien!_” he said at length, with a curious look on his face. “The
plot develops. Pass me, I pray you, that ‘Peerage’ on the top shelf
there.” He turned the leaves. “Ah, here we are! ‘Yardly . . . 10th
viscount, served South African War’ . . . _tout ça n’a pas
d’importance_ . . . ‘mar. 1907 Hon. Maude Stopperton, fourth
daughter of 3rd Baron Cotteril’ . . . um, um, um, . . . ‘has iss.
two daughters, born 1908, 1910. . . . Clubs . . . residences.’ . . .
_Voilà_, that does not tell us much. But to-morrow morning we see
this _milord_!”

“What?”

“Yes. I telegraphed to him.”

“I thought you had washed your hands of the case?”

“I am not acting for Miss Marvell since she refuses to be guided
by my advice. What I do now is for my own satisfaction—the
satisfaction of Hercule Poirot! Decidedly, I must have a finger in
this pie.”

“And you calmly wire Lord Yardly to dash up to town just to suit
your convenience. He won’t be pleased.”

“_Au contraire_, if I preserve for him his family diamond, he ought
to be very grateful.”

“Then you really think there is a chance of it being stolen?” I
asked eagerly.

“Almost a certainty,” replied Poirot placidly. “Everything points
that way.”

“But how——”

Poirot stopped my eager questions with an airy gesture of the hand.

“Not now, I pray you. Let us not confuse the mind. And observe that
‘Peerage’—how you have replaced him! See you not that the tallest
books go in the top shelf, the next tallest in the row beneath,
and so on. Thus we have order, _method_, which, as I have often
told you, Hastings——”

“Exactly,” I said hastily, and put the offending volume in its
proper place.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


Lord Yardly turned out to be a cheery, loud-voiced sportsman with
a rather red face, but with a good-humoured bonhomie about him that
was distinctly attractive and made up for any lack of mentality.

“Extraordinary business this, Monsieur Poirot. Can’t make head or
tail of it. Seems my wife’s been getting odd kind of letters, and
that this Miss Marvell’s had ’em too. What does it all mean?”

Poirot handed him the copy of _Society Gossip_.

“First, _milord_, I would ask you if these facts are substantially
correct?”

The peer took it. His face darkened with anger as he read.

“Damned nonsense!” he spluttered. “There’s never been any romantic
story attaching to the diamond. It came from India originally, I
believe. I never heard of all this Chinese god stuff.”

“Still, the stone _is_ known as ‘The Star of the East.’”

“Well, what if it is?” he demanded wrathfully.

Poirot smiled a little, but made no direct reply. “What I would
ask you to do, _milord_, is to place yourself in my hands. If you
do so unreservedly, I have great hopes of averting the catastrophe.”

“Then you think there’s actually something in these wild-cat
tales?”

“Will you do as I ask you?”

“Of course I will, but——”

“_Bien!_ Then permit that I ask you a few questions. This affair
of Yardly Chase, is it, as you say, all fixed up between you and
Mr. Rolf?”

“Oh, he told you about it, did he? No, there’s nothing settled.”
He hesitated, the brick-red colour of his face deepening. “Might
as well get the thing straight. I’ve made rather an ass of myself
in many ways, Monsieur Poirot—and I’m head over ears in debt—but
I want to pull up. I’m fond of the kids, and I want to straighten
things up, and be able to live on at the old place. Gregory Rolf
is offering me big money—enough to set me on my feet again. I don’t
want to do it—I hate the thought of all that crowd play-acting
round the Chase—but I may have to, unless——” He broke off.

Poirot eyed him keenly. “You have, then, another string to your
bow? Permit that I make a guess? It is to sell the Star of the
East?”

Lord Yardly nodded. “That’s it. It’s been in the family for some
generations, but it’s not entailed. Still, it’s not the easiest
thing in the world to find a purchaser. Hoffberg, the Hatton Garden
man, is on the look-out for a likely customer, but he’ll have to
find one soon, or it’s a washout.”

“One more question, _permettez_—Lady Yardly, which plan does she
approve?”

“Oh, she’s bitterly opposed to my selling the jewel. You know what
women are. She’s all for this film stunt.”

“I comprehend,” said Poirot. He remained a moment or so in thought,
then rose briskly to his feet. “You return to Yardly Chase at once?
_Bien!_ Say no word to anyone—to _anyone_ mind—but expect us there
this evening. We will arrive shortly after five.”

“All right, but I don’t see——”

“_Ça n’a pas d’importance_,” said Poirot kindly. “You will that I
preserve for you your diamond, _n’est-ce pas_?”

“Yes, but——”

“Then do as I say.”

A sadly bewildered nobleman left the room.

  •   •   •   •   •   •   •

It was half-past five when we arrived at Yardly Chase, and followed
the dignified butler to the old panelled hall with its fire of
blazing logs. A pretty picture met our eyes: Lady Yardly and her
two children, the mother’s proud dark head bent down over the two
fair ones. Lord Yardly stood near, smiling down on them.

“Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings,” announced the butler.

Lady Yardly looked up with a start, her husband came forward
uncertainly, his eyes seeking instruction from Poirot. The little
man was equal to the occasion.

“All my excuses! It is that I investigate still this affair of Miss
Marvell’s. She comes to you on Friday, does she not? I make a
little tour first to make sure that all is secure. Also I wanted
to ask of Lady Yardly if she recollected at all the postmarks on
the letters she received?”

Lady Yardly shook her head regretfully. “I’m afraid I don’t. It is
stupid of me. But, you see, I never dreamt of taking them
seriously.”

“You’ll stay the night?” said Lord Yardly.

“Oh, _milord_, I fear to incommode you. We have left our bags at
the inn.”

“That’s all right.” Lord Yardly had his cue. “We’ll send down for
them. No, no—no trouble, I assure you.”

Poirot permitted himself to be persuaded, and sitting down by Lady
Yardly, began to make friends with the children. In a short time
they were all romping together, and had dragged me into the game.

“_Vous êtes bonne mère_,” said Poirot, with a gallant little bow,
as the children were removed reluctantly by a stern nurse.

Lady Yardly smoothed her ruffled hair.

“I adore them,” she said with a little catch in her voice.

“And they you—with reason!” Poirot bowed again.

A dressing-gong sounded, and we rose to go up to our rooms. At that
moment the butler entered with a telegram on a salver which he
handed to Lord Yardly. The latter tore it open with a brief word
of apology. As he read it he stiffened visibly.

With an ejaculation, he handed it to his wife. Then he glanced at
my friend.

“Just a minute, Monsieur Poirot. I feel you ought to know about
this. It’s from Hoffberg. He thinks he’s found a customer for the
diamond—an American, sailing for the States to-morrow. They’re
sending down a chap to-night to vet the stone. By Jove, though, if
this goes through——” Words failed him.

Lady Yardly had turned away. She still held the telegram in her
hand.

“I wish you wouldn’t sell it, George,” she said, in a low voice.
“It’s been in the family so long.” She waited, as though for a
reply, but when none came her face hardened. She shrugged her
shoulders. “I must go and dress. I suppose I had better display
‘the goods.’” She turned to Poirot with a slight grimace. “It’s
one of the most hideous necklaces that was ever designed! George
has always promised to have the stones reset for me, but it’s never
been done.” She left the room.

Half an hour later, we three were assembled in the great drawing-room
awaiting the lady. It was already a few minutes past the dinner
hour.

Suddenly there was a low rustle, and Lady Yardly appeared framed
in the doorway, a radiant figure in a long white shimmering dress.
Round the column of her neck was a rivulet of fire. She stood there
with one hand just touching the necklace.

“Behold the sacrifice,” she said gaily. Her ill-humour seemed to
have vanished. “Wait while I turn the big light on and you shall
feast your eyes on the ugliest necklace in England.”

The switches were just outside the door. As she stretched out her
hand to them, the incredible thing happened. Suddenly without any
warning, every light was extinguished, the door banged, and from
the other side of it came a long-drawn piercing woman’s scream.

“My God!” cried Lord Yardly. “That was Maude’s voice! What has
happened?”

We rushed blindly for the door, cannoning into each other in the
darkness. It was some minutes before we could find it. What a sight
met our eyes! Lady Yardly lay senseless on the marble floor, a
crimson mark on her white throat where the necklace had been
wrenched from her neck.

As we bent over her, uncertain for the moment whether she were dead
or alive, her eyelids opened.

“The Chinaman,” she whispered painfully. “The Chinaman—the side
door.”

Lord Yardly sprang up with an oath. I accompanied him, my heart
beating wildly. The Chinaman again! The side door in question was
a small one in the angle of the wall, not more than a dozen yards
from the scene of the tragedy. As we reached it, I gave a cry.
There, just short of the threshold, lay the glittering necklace,
evidently dropped by the thief in the panic of his flight. I
swooped joyously down on it. Then I uttered another cry which Lord
Yardly echoed. For in the middle of the necklace was a great gap.
The Star of the East was missing!

“That settles it,” I breathed. “These were no ordinary thieves.
This one stone was all they wanted.”

“But how did the fellow get in?”

“Through this door.”

“But it’s always locked.”

I shook my head. “It’s not locked now. See.” I pulled it open as
I spoke.

As I did so something fluttered to the ground. I picked it up. It
was a piece of silk, and the embroidery was unmistakable. It had
been torn from a Chinaman’s robe.

“In his haste it caught in the door,” I explained. “Come, hurry.
He cannot have gone far as yet.”

But in vain we hunted and searched. In the pitch darkness of the
night, the thief had found it easy to make his getaway. We returned
reluctantly, and Lord Yardly sent off one of the footmen post-haste
to fetch the police.

Lady Yardly, aptly ministered to by Poirot, who is as good as a
woman in these matters, was sufficiently recovered to be able to
tell her story.

“I was just going to turn on the other light,” she said, “when a
man sprang on me from behind. He tore my necklace from my neck with
such force that I fell headlong to the floor. As I fell I saw him
disappearing through the side door. Then I realized by the pig-tail
and the embroidered robe that he was a Chinaman.” She stopped with
a shudder.

The butler reappeared. He spoke in a low voice to Lord Yardly.

“A gentleman from Mr. Hoffberg’s, m’lord. He says you expect him.”

“Good heavens!” cried the distracted nobleman. “I must see him, I
suppose. No, not here, Mullings, in the library.”

I drew Poirot aside.

“Look here, my dear fellow, hadn’t we better get back to London?”

“You think so, Hastings? Why?”

“Well”—I coughed delicately—“things haven’t gone very well, have
they? I mean, you tell Lord Yardly to place himself in your hands
and all will be well—and then the diamond vanishes from under your
very nose!”

“True,” said Poirot, rather crestfallen. “It was not one of my most
striking triumphs.”

This way of describing events almost caused me to smile, but I
stuck to my guns.

“So, having—pardon the expression—rather made a mess of things,
don’t you think it would be more graceful to leave immediately?”

“And the dinner, the without doubt excellent dinner, that the
_chef_ of Lord Yardly has prepared?”

“Oh, what’s dinner!” I said impatiently.

Poirot held up his hands in horror.

“_Mon Dieu!_ It is that in this country you treat the affairs
gastronomic with a criminal indifference.”

“There’s another reason why we should get back to London as soon
as possible,” I continued.

“What is that, my friend?”

“The other diamond,” I said, lowering my voice. “Miss Marvell’s.”

“_Eh bien_, what of it?”

“Don’t you see?” His unusual obtuseness annoyed me. What had
happened to his usually keen wits? “They’ve got one, now they’ll
go for the other.”

“_Tiens!_” cried Poirot, stepping back a pace and regarding me with
admiration. “But your brain marches to a marvel, my friend! Figure
to yourself that for the moment I had not thought of that! But
there is plenty of time. The full of the moon, it is not until
Friday.”

I shook my head dubiously. The full of the moon theory left me
entirely cold. I had my way with Poirot, however, and we departed
immediately, leaving behind us a note of explanation and apology
for Lord Yardly.

My idea was to go at once to the _Magnificent_, and relate to Miss
Marvell what had occurred, but Poirot vetoed the plan, and insisted
that the morning would be time enough. I gave in rather grudgingly.

In the morning Poirot seemed strangely disinclined to stir out. I
began to suspect that, having made a mistake to start with, he was
singularly loath to proceed with the case. In answer to my
persuasions, he pointed out, with admirable common sense, that as
the details of the affair at Yardly Chase were already in the
morning papers the Rolfs would know quite as much as we could tell
them. I gave way unwillingly.

Events proved my forebodings to be justified. About two o’clock,
the telephone rang. Poirot answered it. He listened for some
moments, then with a brief “_Bien, j’y serai_” he rang off, and
turned to me.

“What do you think, _mon ami_?” He looked half ashamed, half
excited. “The diamond of Miss Marvell, it has been stolen.”

“What?” I cried, springing up. “And what about the ‘full of the
moon’ now?” Poirot hung his head. “When did this happen?”

“This morning, I understand.”

I shook my head sadly. “If only you had listened to me. You see I
was right.”

“It appears so, _mon ami_,” said Poirot cautiously. “Appearances
are deceptive, they say, but it certainly appears so.”

As we hurried in a taxi to the _Magnificent_, I puzzled out the
true inwardness of the scheme.

“That ‘full of the moon’ idea was clever. The whole point of it
was to get us to concentrate on the Friday, and so be off our guard
beforehand. It is a pity you did not realize that.”

“_Ma foi!_” said Poirot airily, his nonchalance quite restored
after its brief eclipse. “One cannot think of everything!”

I felt sorry for him. He did so hate failure of any kind.

“Cheer up,” I said consolingly. “Better luck next time.”

At the _Magnificent_, we were ushered at once into the manager’s
office. Gregory Rolf was there with two men from Scotland Yard. A
pale-faced clerk sat opposite them.

Rolf nodded to us as we entered.

“We’re getting to the bottom of it,” he said. “But it’s almost
unbelievable. How the guy had the nerve I can’t think.”

A very few minutes sufficed to give us the facts. Mr. Rolf had gone
out of the hotel at 11.15. At 11.30, a gentleman, so like him in
appearance as to pass muster, entered the hotel and demanded the
jewel-case from the safe deposit. He duly signed the receipt,
remarking carelessly as he did so: “Looks a bit different from my
ordinary one, but I hurt my hand getting out of the taxi.” The
clerk merely smiled and remarked that he saw very little difference.
Rolf laughed and said: “Well, don’t run me in as a crook this time,
anyway. I’ve been getting threatening letters from a Chinaman, and
the worst of it is I look rather like a Chink myself—it’s something
about the eyes.”

“I looked at him,” said the clerk who was telling us this, “and I
saw at once what he meant. The eyes slanted up at the corners like
an Oriental’s. I’d never noticed it before.”

“Darn it all, man,” roared Gregory Rolf, leaning forward, “do you
notice it now?”

The man looked up at him and started.

“No, sir,” he said. “I can’t say I do.” And indeed there was
nothing even remotely Oriental about the frank brown eyes that
looked into ours.

The Scotland Yard man grunted. “Bold customer. Thought the eyes
might be noticed, and took the bull by the horns to disarm
suspicion. He must have watched you out of the hotel, sir, and
nipped in as soon as you were well away.”

“What about the jewel-case?” I asked.

“It was found in a corridor of the hotel. Only one thing had been
taken—‘the Western Star.’”

We stared at each other—the whole thing was so bizarre, so unreal.

Poirot hopped briskly to his feet. “I have not been of much use,
I fear,” he said regretfully. “Is it permitted to see Madame?”

“I guess she’s prostrated with the shock,” explained Rolf.

“Then perhaps I might have a few words alone with you, monsieur?”

“Certainly.”

In about five minutes Poirot reappeared.

“Now, my friend,” he said gaily. “To a post office. I have to send
a telegram.”

“Who to?”

“Lord Yardly.” He discounted further inquiries by slipping his arm
through mine. “Come, come, _mon ami_. I know all that you feel
about this miserable business. I have not distinguished myself!
You, in my place, might have distinguished yourself! _Bien!_ All
is admitted. Let us forget it and have lunch.”

It was about four o’clock when we entered Poirot’s rooms. A figure
rose from a chair by the window. It was Lord Yardly. He looked
haggard and distraught.

“I got your wire and came up at once. Look here, I’ve been round
to Hoffberg, and they know nothing about that man of theirs last
night, or the wire either. Do you think that——”

Poirot held up his hand.

“My excuses! I sent that wire, and hired the gentleman in question.”

“_You_—but why? What?” The nobleman spluttered impotently.

“My little idea was to bring things to a head,” explained Poirot
placidly.

“Bring things to a head! Oh, my God!” cried Lord Yardly.

“And the ruse succeeded,” said Poirot cheerfully. “Therefore,
_milord_, I have much pleasure in returning you—this!” With a
dramatic gesture he produced a glittering object. It was a great
diamond.

“The Star of the East,” gasped Lord Yardly. “But I don’t
understand——”

“No?” said Poirot. “It makes no matter. Believe me, it was necessary
for the diamond to be stolen. I promised you that it should be
preserved to you, and I have kept my word. You must permit me to
keep my little secret. Convey, I beg of you, the assurances of my
deepest respect to Lady Yardly, and tell her how pleased I am to
be able to restore her jewel to her. What _beau temps_, is it not?
Good day, _milord_.”

And smiling and talking, the amazing little man conducted the
bewildered nobleman to the door. He returned gently rubbing his
hands.

“Poirot,” I said. “Am I quite demented?”

“No, _mon ami_, but you are, as always, in a mental fog.”

“How did you get the diamond.”

“From Mr. Rolf.”

“Rolf?”

“_Mais oui!_ The warning letters, the Chinaman, the article in
_Society Gossip_, all sprang from the ingenious brain of Mr. Rolf!
The two diamonds, supposed to be so miraculously alike—bah! they
did not exist. There was only _one_ diamond, my friend! Originally
in the Yardly collection, for three years it has been in the
possession of Mr. Rolf. He stole it this morning with the assistance
of a touch of grease paint at the corner of each eye! Ah, I must
see him on the film, he is indeed an artist, _celui-là_!

“But why should he steal his own diamond?” I asked, puzzled.

“For many reasons. To begin with, Lady Yardly was getting restive.”

“Lady Yardly?”

“You comprehend she was left much alone in California. Her husband
was amusing himself elsewhere. Mr. Rolf was handsome, he had an
air about him of romance. But _au fond_, he is very business-like,
_ce monsieur_! He made love to Lady Yardly, and then he blackmailed
her. I taxed the lady with the truth the other night, and she
admitted it. She swore that she had only been indiscreet, and I
believe her. But, undoubtedly, Rolf had letters of hers that could
be twisted to bear a different interpretation. Terrified by the
threat of a divorce, and the prospect of being separated from her
children, she agreed to all he wished. She had no money of her own,
and she was forced to permit him to substitute a paste replica for
the real stone. The coincidence of the date of the appearance of
‘the Western Star’ struck me at once. All goes well. Lord Yardly
prepares to range himself—to settle down. And then comes the menace
of the possible sale of the diamond. The substitution will be
discovered. Without doubt she writes off frantically to Gregory
Rolf who has just arrived in England. He soothes her by promising
to arrange all—and prepares for a double robbery. In this way he
will quiet the lady, who might conceivably tell all to her husband,
an affair which would not suit our blackmailer at all, he will have
£50,000 insurance money (aha, you had forgotten that!), and he will
still have the diamond! At this point I put my finger in the pie.
The arrival of a diamond expert is announced. Lady Yardly, as I
felt sure she would, immediately arranges a robbery—and does it
very well too! But Hercule Poirot, he sees nothing but facts. What
happens in actuality? The lady switches off the light, bangs the
door, throws the necklace down the passage, and screams. She has
already wrenched out the diamond with pliers upstairs——”

“But we saw the necklace round her neck!” I objected.

“I demand pardon, my friend. Her hand concealed the part of it
where the gap would have shown. To place a piece of silk in the
door beforehand is child’s play! Of course, as soon as Rolf read
of the robbery, he arranged his own little comedy. And very well
he played it!”

“What did you say to him?” I asked with lively curiosity.

“I said to him that Lady Yardly had told her husband all, that I
was empowered to recover the jewel, and that if it were not
immediately handed over proceedings would be taken. Also a few more
little lies which occurred to me. He was as wax in my hands!”

I pondered the matter.

“It seems a little unfair on Mary Marvell. She has lost her diamond
through no fault of her own.”

“Bah!” said Poirot brutally. “She has a magnificent advertisement.
That is all she cares for, that one! Now the other, she is
different. _Bonne mère, très femme!_”

“Yes,” I said doubtfully, hardly sharing Poirot’s views on
femininity. “I suppose it was Rolf who sent her the duplicate
letters.”

“_Pas du tout_,” said Poirot briskly. “She came by the advice of
Mary Cavendish to seek my aid in her dilemma. Then she heard that
Mary Marvell, whom she knew to be her enemy, had been here, and
she changed her mind, jumping at a pretext that _you_, my friend,
offered her. A very few questions sufficed to show me that _you_
told her of the letters, not she you! She jumped at the chance your
words offered.”

“I don’t believe it,” I cried, stung.

“_Si, si, mon ami_, it is a pity that you study not the psychology.
She told you that the letters were destroyed? Oh, la la, _never_
does a woman destroy a letter if she can avoid it! Not even if it
would be more prudent to do so!”

“It’s all very well,” I said, my anger rising, “but you’ve made a
perfect fool of me! From beginning to end! No, it’s all very well
to try and explain it away afterwards. There really is a limit!”

“But you were so enjoying yourself, my friend. I had not the heart
to shatter your illusions.”

“It’s no good. You’ve gone a bit too far this time.”

“_Mon Dieu!_ but how you enrage yourself for nothing, _mon ami_!”

“I’m fed up!” I went out, banging the door. Poirot had made an
absolute laughing-stock of me. I decided that he needed a sharp
lesson. I would let some time elapse before I forgave him. He had
encouraged me to make a perfect fool of myself!




  II


  The Tragedy at Marsdon Manor


I had been called away from town for a few days, and on my return
found Poirot in the act of strapping up his small valise.

“_A la bonne heure_, Hastings. I feared you would not have returned
in time to accompany me.”

“You are called away on a case, then?”

“Yes, though I am bound to admit that, on the face of it, the
affair does not seem promising. The Northern Union Insurance
Company have asked me to investigate the death of a Mr. Maltravers
who a few weeks ago insured his life with them for the large sum
of fifty thousand pounds.”

“Yes?” I said, much interested.

“There was, of course, the usual suicide clause in the policy. In
the event of his committing suicide within a year the premiums
would be forfeited. Mr. Maltravers was duly examined by the
Company’s own doctor, and although he was a man slightly past the
prime of life was passed as being in quite sound health. However,
on Wednesday last—the day before yesterday—the body of Mr.
Maltravers was found in the grounds of his house in Essex, Marsdon
Manor, and the cause of his death is described as some kind of
internal hæmorrhage. That in itself would be nothing remarkable,
but sinister rumours as to Mr. Maltravers’ financial position have
been in the air of late, and the Northern Union have ascertained
beyond any possible doubt that the deceased gentleman stood upon
the verge of bankruptcy. Now that alters matters considerably.
Maltravers had a beautiful young wife, and it is suggested that he
got together all the ready money he could for the purpose of paying
the premiums on a life insurance for his wife’s benefit, and then
committed suicide. Such a thing is not uncommon. In any case, my
friend Alfred Wright, who is a director of the Northern Union, has
asked me to investigate the facts of the case, but, as I told him,
I am not very hopeful of success. If the cause of the death had
been heart failure, I should have been more sanguine. Heart failure
may always be translated as the inability of the local G.P. to
discover what his patient really did die of, but a hæmorrhage seems
fairly definite. Still, we can but make some necessary inquiries.
Five minutes to pack your bag, Hastings, and we will take a taxi
to Liverpool Street.”

About an hour later, we alighted from a Great Eastern train at the
little station of Marsdon Leigh. Inquiries at the station yielded
the information that Marsdon Manor was about a mile distant. Poirot
decided to walk, and we betook ourselves along the main street.

“What is our plan of campaign?” I asked.

“First I will call upon the doctor. I have ascertained that there
is only one doctor in Marsdon Leigh, Dr. Ralph Bernard. Ah, here
we are at his house.”

The house in question was a kind of superior cottage, standing back
a little from the road. A brass plate on the gate bore the doctor’s
name. We passed up the path and rang the bell.

We proved to be fortunate in our call. It was the doctor’s
consulting hour, and for the moment there were no patients waiting
for him. Dr. Bernard was an elderly man, high-shouldered and
stooping, with a pleasant vagueness of manner.

Poirot introduced himself and explained the purpose of our visit,
adding that Insurance Companies were bound to investigate fully in
a case of this kind.

“Of course, of course,” said Dr. Bernard vaguely. “I suppose, as
he was such a rich man, his life was insured for a big sum?”

“You consider him a rich man, doctor?”

The doctor looked rather surprised.

“Was he not? He kept two cars, you know, and Marsdon Manor is a
pretty big place to keep up, although I believe he bought it very
cheap.”

“I understand that he had had considerable losses of late,” said
Poirot, watching the doctor narrowly.

The latter, however, merely shook his head sadly.

“Is that so? Indeed. It is fortunate for his wife, then, that there
is this life insurance. A very beautiful and charming young
creature, but terribly unstrung by this sad catastrophe. A mass of
nerves, poor thing. I have tried to spare her all I can, but of
course the shock was bound to be considerable.”

“You had been attending Mr. Maltravers recently?”

“My dear sir, I never attended him.”

“What?”

“I understand Mr. Maltravers was a Christian Scientist—or something
of that kind.”

“But you examined the body?”

“Certainly. I was fetched by one of the under-gardeners.”

“And the cause of death was clear?”

“Absolutely. There was blood on the lips, but most of the bleeding
must have been internal.”

“Was he still lying where he had been found?”

“Yes, the body had not been touched. He was lying at the edge of
a small plantation. He had evidently been out shooting rooks, a
small rook rifle lay beside him. The hæmorrhage must have occurred
quite suddenly. Gastric ulcer, without a doubt.”

“No question of his having been shot, eh?”

“My dear sir!”

“I demand pardon,” said Poirot humbly. “But, if my memory is not
at fault, in the case of a recent murder, the doctor first gave a
verdict of heart failure—altering it when the local constable
pointed out that there was a bullet wound through the head!”

“You will not find any bullet wounds on the body of Mr. Maltravers,”
said Dr. Bernard dryly. “Now, gentlemen, if there is nothing
further——”

We took the hint.

“Good morning, and many thanks to you, doctor, for so kindly
answering our questions. By the way, you saw no need for an
autopsy?”

“Certainly not.” The doctor became quite apoplectic. “The cause of
death was clear, and in my profession we see no need to distress
unduly the relatives of a dead patient.”

And, turning, the doctor slammed the door sharply in our faces.

“And what do you think of Dr. Bernard, Hastings?” inquired Poirot,
as we proceeded on our way to the Manor.

“Rather an old ass.”

“Exactly. Your judgments of character are always profound, my
friend.”

I glanced at him uneasily, but he seemed perfectly serious. A
twinkle, however, came into his eye, and he added slyly:

“That is to say, when there is no question of a beautiful woman!”

I looked at him coldly.

On our arrival at the manor-house, the door was opened to us by a
middle-aged parlourmaid. Poirot handed her his card, and a letter
from the Insurance Company for Mrs. Maltravers. She showed us into
a small morning-room, and retired to tell her mistress. About ten
minutes elapsed, and then the door opened, and a slender figure in
widow’s weeds stood upon the threshold.

“Monsieur Poirot?” she faltered.

“Madame!” Poirot sprang gallantly to his feet and hastened towards
her. “I cannot tell you how I regret to derange you in this way.
But what will you? _Les affaires_—they know no mercy.”

Mrs. Maltravers permitted him to lead her to a chair. Her eyes were
red with weeping, but the temporary disfigurement could not conceal
her extraordinary beauty. She was about twenty-seven or eight, and
very fair, with large blue eyes and a pretty pouting mouth.

“It is something about my husband’s insurance, is it? But must I
be bothered _now_—so soon?”

“Courage, my dear Madame. Courage! You see, your late husband
insured his life for rather a large sum, and in such a case the
Company always has to satisfy itself as to a few details. They have
empowered me to act for them. You can rest assured that I will do
all in my power to render the matter not too unpleasant for you.
Will you recount to me briefly the sad events of Wednesday?”

“I was changing for tea when my maid came up—one of the gardeners
had just run to the house. He had found——”

Her voice trailed away. Poirot pressed her hand sympathetically.

“I comprehend. Enough! You had seen your husband earlier in the
afternoon?”

“Not since lunch. I had walked down to the village for some stamps,
and I believe he was out pottering round the grounds.”

“Shooting rooks, eh?”

“Yes, he usually took his little rook rifle with him, and I heard
one or two shots in the distance.”

“Where is this little rook rifle now?”

“In the hall, I think.”

She led the way out of the room and found and handed the little
weapon to Poirot, who examined it cursorily.

“Two shots fired, I see,” he observed, as he handed it back. “And
now, madame, if I might see——”

He paused delicately.

“The servant shall take you,” she murmured, averting her head.

The parlourmaid, summoned, led Poirot upstairs. I remained with
the lovely and unfortunate woman. It was hard to know whether to
speak or remain silent. I essayed one or two general reflections
to which she responded absently, and in a very few minutes Poirot
rejoined us.

“I thank you for all your courtesy, madame. I do not think you need
be troubled any further with this matter. By the way, do you know
anything of your husband’s financial position?”

She shook her head.

“Nothing whatever. I am very stupid over business things.”

“I see. Then you can give us no clue as to why he suddenly decided
to insure his life? He had not done so previously, I understand.”

“Well, we had only been married a little over a year. But, as to
why he insured his life, it was because he had absolutely made up
his mind that he would not live long. He had a strong premonition
of his own death. I gather that he had had one hæmorrhage already,
and that he knew that another one would prove fatal. I tried to
dispel these gloomy fears of his, but without avail. Alas, he was
only too right!”

Tears in her eyes, she bade us a dignified farewell. Poirot made
a characteristic gesture as we walked down the drive together.

“_Eh bien_, that is that! Back to London, my friend, there appears
to be no mouse in this mouse-hole. And yet——”

“Yet what?”

“A slight discrepancy, that is all! You noticed it? You did not?
Still, life is full of discrepancies, and assuredly the man cannot
have taken his own life—there is no poison that would fill his
mouth with blood. No, no, I must resign myself to the fact that
all here is clear and above-board—but who is this?”

A tall young man was striding up the drive towards us. He passed
us without making any sign, but I noted that he was not ill-looking,
with a lean, deeply bronzed face that spoke of life in a tropic
clime. A gardener who was sweeping up leaves had paused for a
minute in his task, and Poirot ran quickly up to him.

“Tell me, I pray you, who is that gentleman? Do you know him?”

“I don’t remember his name, sir, though I did hear it. He was
staying down here last week for a night. Tuesday, it was.”

“Quick, _mon ami_, let us follow him.”

We hastened up the drive after the retreating figure. A glimpse of
a black-robed figure on the terrace at the side of the house, and
our quarry swerved and we after him, so that we were witnesses of
the meeting.

Mrs. Maltravers almost staggered where she stood, and her face
blanched noticeably.

“You,” she gasped. “I thought you were on the sea—on your way to
East Africa?”

“I got some news from my lawyers that detained me,” explained the
young man. “My old uncle in Scotland died unexpectedly and left me
some money. Under the circumstances I thought it better to cancel
my passage. Then I saw this bad news in the paper and I came down
to see if there was anything I could do. You’ll want some one to
look after things for you a bit perhaps.”

At that moment they became aware of our presence. Poirot stepped
forward, and with many apologies explained that he had left his
stick in the hall. Rather reluctantly, it seemed to me, Mrs.
Maltravers made the necessary introduction.

“Monsieur Poirot, Captain Black.”

A few minutes’ chat ensued, in the course of which Poirot elicited
the fact that Captain Black was putting up at the Anchor Inn. The
missing stick not having been discovered (which was not surprising),
Poirot uttered more apologies and we withdrew.

We returned to the village at a great pace, and Poirot made a bee
line for the Anchor Inn.

“Here we establish ourselves until our friend the Captain returns,”
he explained. “You notice that I emphasized the point that we were
returning to London by the first train? Possibly you thought I
meant it. But no—you observed Mrs. Maltravers’ face when she caught
sight of this young Black? She was clearly taken aback, and he—_eh
bien_, he was very devoted, did you not think so? And he was here
on Tuesday night—the day before Mr. Maltravers died. We must
investigate the doings of Captain Black, Hastings.”

In about half an hour we espied our quarry approaching the inn.
Poirot went out and accosted him and presently brought him up to
the room we had engaged.

“I have been telling Captain Black of the mission which brings us
here,” he explained. “You can understand, _monsieur le capitaine_,
that I am anxious to arrive at Mr. Maltravers’ state of mind
immediately before his death, and that at the same time I do not
wish to distress Mrs. Maltravers unduly by asking her painful
questions. Now, you were here just before the occurrence, and can
give us equally valuable information.”

“I’ll do anything I can to help you, I’m sure,” replied the young
soldier; “but I’m afraid I didn’t notice anything out of the
ordinary. You see, although Maltravers was an old friend of my
people’s, I didn’t know him very well myself.”

“You came down—when?”

“Tuesday afternoon. I went up to town early Wednesday morning, as
my boat sailed from Tilbury about twelve o’clock. But some news I
got made me alter my plans, as I dare say you heard me explain to
Mrs. Maltravers.”

“You were returning to East Africa, I understand?”

“Yes. I’ve been out there ever since the War—a great country.”

“Exactly. Now what was the talk about at dinner on Tuesday night?”

“Oh, I don’t know. The usual odd topics. Maltravers asked after my
people, and then we discussed the question of German reparations,
and then Mrs. Maltravers asked a lot of questions about East
Africa, and I told them one or two yarns, that’s about all, I
think.”

“Thank you.”

Poirot was silent for a moment, then he said gently: “With your
permission, I should like to try a little experiment. You have told
us all that your conscious self knows, I want now to question your
subconscious self.”

“Psychoanalysis, what?” said Black, with visible alarm.

“Oh, no,” said Poirot reassuringly. “You see, it is like this, I
give you a word, you answer with another, and so on. Any word, the
first one you think of. Shall we begin?”

“All right,” said Black slowly, but he looked uneasy.

“Note down the words, please, Hastings,” said Poirot. Then he took
from his pocket his big turnip-faced watch and laid it on the table
beside him. “We will commence. Day.”

There was a moment’s pause, and then Black replied:

“_Night_.”

As Poirot proceeded, his answers came quicker.

“Name,” said Poirot.

“_Place_.”

“Bernard.”

“_Shaw_.”

“Tuesday.”

“_Dinner_.”

“Journey.”

“_Ship_.”

“Country.”

“_Uganda_.”

“Story.”

“_Lions_.”

“Rook Rifle.”

“_Farm_.”

“Shot.”

“_Suicide_.”

“Elephant.”

“_Tusks_.”

“Money.”

“_Lawyers_.”

“Thank you, Captain Black. Perhaps you could spare me a few minutes
in about half an hour’s time?”

“Certainly.” The young soldier looked at him curiously and wiped
his brow as he got up.

“And now, Hastings,” said Poirot, smiling at me as the door closed
behind him. “You see it all, do you not?”

“I don’t know what you mean.”

“Does that list of words tell you nothing?”

I scrutinized it, but was forced to shake my head.

“I will assist you. To begin with, Black answered well within the
normal time limit, with no pauses, so we can take it that he
himself has no guilty knowledge to conceal. ‘Day’ to ‘Night’ and
‘Place’ to ‘Name’ are normal associations. I began work with
‘Bernard’ which might have suggested the local doctor had he come
across him at all. Evidently he had not. After our recent
conversation, he gave ‘Dinner’ to my ‘Tuesday,’ but ‘Journey’ and
‘Country’ were answered by ‘Ship’ and ‘Uganda,’ showing clearly
that it was his journey abroad that was important to him and not
the one which brought him down here. ‘Story’ recalls to him one of
the ‘Lion’ stories he told at dinner. I proceed to ‘Rook Rifle’
and he answered with the totally unexpected word ‘Farm.’ When I
say ‘Shot,’ he answers at once ‘Suicide.’ The association seems
clear. A man he knows committed suicide with a rook rifle on a farm
somewhere. Remember, too, that his mind is still on the stories he
told at dinner, and I think you will agree that I shall not be far
from the truth if I recall Captain Black and ask him to repeat the
particular suicide story which he told at the dinner-table on
Tuesday evening.”

Black was straightforward enough over the matter.

“Yes, I did tell them that story now that I come to think of it.
Chap shot himself on a farm out there. Did it with a rook rifle
through the roof of the mouth, bullet lodged in the brain. Doctors
were no end puzzled over it—there was nothing to show except a
little blood on the lips. But what——”

“What has it got to do with Mr. Maltravers? You did not know, I
see, that he was found with a rook rifle by his side.”

“You mean my story suggested to him—oh, but that is awful!”

“Do not distress yourself—it would have been one way or another.
Well, I must get on the telephone to London.”

Poirot had a lengthy conversation over the wire, and came back
thoughtful. He went off by himself in the afternoon, and it was
not till seven o’clock that he announced that he could put it off
no longer, but must break the news to the young widow. My sympathy
had already gone out to her unreservedly. To be left penniless,
and with the knowledge that her husband had killed himself to
assure her future was a hard burden for any woman to bear. I
cherished a secret hope, however, that young Black might prove
capable of consoling her after her first grief had passed. He
evidently admired her enormously.

Our interview with the lady was painful. She refused vehemently to
believe the facts that Poirot advanced, and when she was at last
convinced broke down into bitter weeping. An examination of the
body turned our suspicions into certainty. Poirot was very sorry
for the poor lady, but, after all, he was employed by the Insurance
Company, and what could he do? As he was preparing to leave he said
gently to Mrs. Maltravers:

“Madame, you of all people should know that there are no dead!”

“What do you mean?” she faltered, her eyes growing wide.

“Have you never taken part in any spiritualistic séances? You are
mediumistic, you know.”

“I have been told so. But you do not believe in Spiritualism,
surely?”

“Madame, I have seen some strange things. You know that they say
in the village that this house is haunted?”

She nodded, and at that moment the parlourmaid announced that
dinner was ready.

“Won’t you just stay and have something to eat?”

We accepted gratefully, and I felt that our presence could not but
help distract her a little from her own griefs.

We had just finished our soup, when there was a scream outside the
door, and the sound of breaking crockery. We jumped up. The
parlourmaid appeared, her hand to her heart.

“It was a man—standing in the passage.”

Poirot rushed out, returning quickly.

“There is no one there.”

“Isn’t there, sir?” said the parlourmaid weakly. “Oh, it did give
me a start!”

“But why?”

She dropped her voice to a whisper.

“I thought—I thought it was the master—it looked like ’im.”

I saw Mrs. Maltravers give a terrified start, and my mind flew to
the old superstition that a suicide cannot rest. She thought of it
too, I am sure, for a minute later, she caught Poirot’s arm with
a scream.

“Didn’t you hear that? Those three taps on the window? That’s how
_he_ always used to tap when he passed round the house.”

“The ivy,” I cried. “It was the ivy against the pane.”

But a sort of terror was gaining on us all. The parlourmaid was
obviously unstrung, and when the meal was over Mrs. Maltravers
besought Poirot not to go at once. She was clearly terrified to be
left alone. We sat in the little morning-room. The wind was getting
up, and moaning round the house in an eerie fashion. Twice the door
of the room came unlatched and the door slowly opened, and each
time she clung to me with a terrified gasp.

“Ah, but this door, it is bewitched!” cried

Poirot angrily at last. He got up and shut it once more, then
turned the key in the lock. “I shall lock it, so!”

“Don’t do that,” she gasped, “if it should come open now——”

And even as she spoke the impossible happened. The locked door
slowly swung open. I could not see into the passage from where I
sat, but she and Poirot were facing it. She gave one long shriek
as she turned to him.

“You saw him—there in the passage?” she cried.

He was staring down at her with a puzzled face, then shook his
head.

“I saw him—my husband—you must have seen him too?”

“Madame, I saw nothing. You are not well—unstrung——”

“I am perfectly well, I——Oh, God!”

Suddenly, without any warning, the lights quivered and went out.
Out of the darkness came three loud raps. I could hear Mrs.
Maltravers moaning.

And then—I saw!

The man I had seen on the bed upstairs stood there facing us,
gleaming with a faint ghostly light. There was blood on his lips,
and he held his right hand out, pointing. Suddenly a brilliant
light seemed to proceed from it. It passed over Poirot and me, and
fell on Mrs. Maltravers. I saw her white terrified face, and
something else!

“My God, Poirot!” I cried. “Look at her hand, her right hand. It’s
all red!”

Her own eyes fell on it, and she collapsed in a heap on the floor.

“Blood,” she cried hysterically. “Yes, it’s blood. I killed him.
I did it. He was showing me, and then I put my hand on the trigger
and pressed. Save me from him—save me! he’s come back!”

Her voice died away in a gurgle.

“Lights,” said Poirot briskly.

The lights went on as if by magic.

“That’s it,” he continued. “You heard, Hastings? And you, Everett?
Oh, by the way, this is Mr. Everett, rather a fine member of the
theatrical profession. I ’phoned to him this afternoon. His make-up
is good, isn’t it? Quite like the dead man, and with a pocket torch
and the necessary phosphorescence he made the proper impression.
I shouldn’t touch her right hand if I were you, Hastings. Red paint
marks so. When the lights went out I clasped her hand, you see. By
the way, we mustn’t miss our train. Inspector Japp is outside the
window. A bad night—but he has been able to while away the time by
tapping on the window every now and then.”

“You see,” continued Poirot, as we walked briskly through the wind
and rain, “there was a little discrepancy. The doctor seemed to
think the deceased was a Christian Scientist, and who could have
given him that impression but Mrs. Maltravers? But to us she
represented him as being in a grave state of apprehension about
his own health. Again, why was she so taken aback by the reappearance
of young Black? And lastly, although I know that convention decrees
that a woman must make a decent pretence of mourning for her
husband, I do not care for such heavily-rouged eyelids! You did
not observe them, Hastings? No? As I always tell you, you see
nothing!”

“Well, there it was. There were the two possibilities. Did Black’s
story suggest an ingenious method of committing suicide to Mr.
Maltravers, or did his other listener, the wife, see an equally
ingenious method of committing murder? I inclined to the latter
view. To shoot himself in the way indicated, he would probably have
had to pull the trigger with his toe—or at least so I imagine.
Now if Maltravers had been found with one boot off, we should
almost certainly have heard of it from some one. An odd detail like
that would have been remembered.

“No, as I say, I inclined to the view that it was a case of murder,
not suicide, but I realized that I had not a shadow of proof in
support of my theory. Hence the elaborate little comedy you saw
played to-night.”

“Even now I don’t quite see all the details of the crime?” I said.

“Let us start from the beginning. Here is a shrewd and scheming
woman who, knowing of her husband’s financial _débâcle_ and tired
of the elderly mate she has only married for his money, induces
him to insure his life for a large sum, and then seeks for the
means to accomplish her purpose. An accident gives her that—the
young soldier’s strange story. The next afternoon when _monsieur
le capitaine_, as she thinks, is on the high seas, she and her
husband are strolling round the grounds. ‘What a curious story that
was last night!’ she observes. ‘Could a man shoot himself in such
a way? Do show me if it is possible!’ The poor fool—he shows her.
He places the end of the rifle in his mouth. She stoops down, and
puts her finger on the trigger, laughing up at him. ‘And now, sir,’
she says saucily, ‘supposing I pull the trigger?’

“And then—and then, Hastings—she pulls it!”




  III


  The Adventure of the Cheap Flat


So far, in the cases which I have recorded, Poirot’s investigations
have started from the central fact, whether murder or robbery, and
have proceeded from thence by a process of logical deduction to
the final triumphant unravelling. In the events I am now about to
chronicle, a remarkable chain of circumstances led from the
apparently trivial incidents which first attracted Poirot’s
attention to the sinister happenings which completed a most unusual
case.

I had been spending the evening with an old friend of mine, Gerald
Parker. There had been, perhaps, about half a dozen people there
besides my host and myself, and the talk fell, as it was bound to
do sooner or later wherever Parker found himself, on the subject
of house-hunting in London. Houses and flats were Parker’s special
hobby. Since the end of the War, he had occupied at least half a
dozen different flats and maisonnettes. No sooner was he settled
anywhere than he would light unexpectedly upon a new find, and
would forthwith depart bag and baggage. His moves were nearly
always accomplished at a slight pecuniary gain, for he had a shrewd
business head, but it was sheer love of the sport that actuated
him, and not a desire to make money at it. We listened to Parker
for some time with the respect of the novice for the expert. Then
it was our turn, and a perfect babel of tongues was let loose.
Finally the floor was left to Mrs. Robinson, a charming little
bride who was there with her husband. I had never met them before,
as Robinson was only a recent acquaintance of Parker’s.

“Talking of flats,” she said, “have you heard of our piece of luck,
Mr. Parker? We’ve got a flat—at last! In Montagu Mansions.”

“Well,” said Parker, “I’ve always said there are plenty of flats—at
a price!”

“Yes, but this isn’t at a price. It’s dirt cheap. Eighty pounds a
year!”

“But—but Montagu Mansions is just off Knightsbridge, isn’t it? Big
handsome building. Or are you talking of a poor relation of the
same name stuck in the slums somewhere?”

“No, it’s the Knightsbridge one. That’s what makes it so wonderful.”

“Wonderful is the word! It’s a blinking miracle. But there must be
a catch somewhere. Big premium, I suppose?”

“No premium!”

“No prem—oh, hold my head, somebody!” groaned Parker.

“But we’ve got to buy the furniture,” continued Mrs. Robinson.

“Ah!” Parker brisked up. “I knew there was a catch!”

“For fifty pounds. And it’s beautifully furnished!”

“I give it up,” said Parker. “The present occupants must be lunatics
with a taste for philanthropy.”

Mrs. Robinson was looking a little troubled. A little pucker
appeared between her dainty brows.

“It _is_ queer, isn’t it? You don’t think that—that—the place is
_haunted_?”

“Never heard of a haunted flat,” declared Parker decisively.

“N-o.” Mrs. Robinson appeared far from convinced. “But there were
several things about it all that struck me as—well, queer.”

“For instance——” I suggested.

“Ah,” said Parker, “our criminal expert’s attention is aroused!
Unburden yourself to him, Mrs. Robinson. Hastings is a great
unraveller of mysteries.”

I laughed, embarrassed but not wholly displeased with the rôle
thrust upon me.

“Oh, not really queer, Captain Hastings, but when we went to the
agents, Stosser and Paul—we hadn’t tried them before because they
only have the expensive Mayfair flats, but we thought at any rate
it would do no harm—everything they offered us was four and five
hundred a year, or else huge premiums, and then, just as we were
going, they mentioned that they had a flat at eighty, but that they
doubted if it would be any good our going there, because it had
been on their books some time and they had sent so many people to
see it that it was almost sure to be taken—‘snapped up’ as the
clerk put it—only people were so tiresome in not letting them know,
and then they went on sending, and people get annoyed at being sent
to a place that had, perhaps, been let some time.”

Mrs. Robinson paused for some much needed breath, and then
continued: “We thanked him, and said that we quite
understood it would probably be no good, but that we should
like an order all the same—just in case. And we went there
straight away in a taxi, for, after all, you never know. No.
4 was on the second floor, and just as we were waiting for
the lift, Elsie Ferguson—she’s a friend of mine, Captain
Hastings, and they are looking for a flat too—came hurrying
down the stairs. ‘Ahead of you for once, my dear,’ she said.
‘But it’s no good. It’s already let.’ That seemed to finish
it, but—well, as John said, the place was very cheap, we
could afford to give more, and perhaps if we offered a
premium.——A horrid thing to do, of course, and I feel quite
ashamed of telling you, but you know what flat-hunting is.”

I assured her that I was well aware that in the struggle for
house-room the baser side of human nature frequently triumphed over
the higher, and that the well-known rule of dog eat dog always
applied.

“So we went up and, would you believe it, the flat wasn’t let at
all. We were shown over it by the maid, and then we saw the
mistress, and the thing was settled then and there. Immediate
possession and fifty pounds for the furniture. We signed the
agreement next day, and we are to move in to-morrow!” Mrs. Robinson
paused triumphantly.

“And what about Mrs. Ferguson?” asked Parker. “Let’s have your
deductions, Hastings.”

“‘Obvious, my dear Watson,’” I quoted lightly. “She went to the
wrong flat.”

“Oh, Captain Hastings, how clever of you!” cried Mrs. Robinson
admiringly.

I rather wished Poirot had been there. Sometimes I have the feeling
that he rather underestimates my capabilities.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


The whole thing was rather amusing, and I propounded the thing as
a mock problem to Poirot on the following morning. He seemed
interested, and questioned me rather narrowly as to the rents of
flats in various localities.

“A curious story,” he said thoughtfully. “Excuse me, Hastings, I
must take a short stroll.”

When he returned, about an hour later, his eyes were gleaming with
a peculiar excitement. He laid his stick on the table, and brushed
the nap of his hat with his usual tender care before he spoke.

“It is as well, _mon ami_, that we have no affairs of moment on
hand. We can devote ourselves wholly to the present investigation.”

“What investigation are you talking about?”

“The remarkable cheapness of your friend’s, Mrs. Robinson’s, new
flat.”

“Poirot, you are not serious!”

“I am most serious. Figure to yourself, my friend, that the real
rent of those flats is £350. I have just ascertained that from the
landlord’s agents. And yet this particular flat is being sublet at
eighty pounds! Why?”

“There must be something wrong with it. Perhaps it is haunted, as
Mrs. Robinson suggested.”

Poirot shook his head in a dissatisfied manner.

“Then again how curious it is that her friend tells her the flat
is let, and, when she goes up, behold, it is not so at all!”

“But surely you agree with me that the other woman must have gone
to the wrong flat. That is the only possible solution.”

“You may or may not be right on that point, Hastings. The fact
still remains that numerous other applicants were sent to see it,
and yet, in spite of its remarkable cheapness, it was still in the
market when Mrs. Robinson arrived.”

“That shows that there must be something wrong about it.”

“Mrs. Robinson did not seem to notice anything amiss. Very curious,
is it not? Did she impress you as being a truthful woman, Hastings?”

“She was a delightful creature!”

“_Évidemment!_ since she renders you incapable of replying to my
question. Describe her to me, then.”

“Well, she’s tall and fair; her hair’s really a beautiful shade of
auburn——”

“Always you have had a penchant for auburn hair!” murmured Poirot.
“But continue.”

“Blue eyes and a very nice complexion and—well, that’s all, I
think,” I concluded lamely.

“And her husband?”

“Oh, he’s quite a nice fellow—nothing startling.”

“Dark or fair?”

“I don’t know—betwixt and between, and just an ordinary sort of
face.”

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, there are hundreds of these average men—and, anyway, you
bring more sympathy and appreciation to your description of women.
Do you know anything about these people? Does Parker know them
well.”

“They are just recent acquaintances, I believe. But surely, Poirot,
you don’t think for an instant——”

Poirot raised his hand.

“_Tout doucement, mon ami_. Have I said that I think anything? All
I say is—it is a curious story. And there is nothing to throw light
upon it; except perhaps the lady’s name, eh, Hastings?”

“Her name is Stella,” I said stiffly, “but I don’t see——”

Poirot interrupted me with a tremendous chuckle. Something seemed
to be amusing him vastly.

“And Stella means a star, does it not? Famous!”

“What on earth——”

“And stars give light! _Voilà!_ Calm yourself, Hastings. Do not
put on that air of injured dignity. Come, we will go to Montagu
Mansions and make a few inquiries.”

I accompanied him, nothing loath. The Mansions were a handsome
block of buildings in excellent repair. A uniformed porter was
sunning himself on the threshold, and it was to him that Poirot
addressed himself:

“Pardon, but could you tell me if a Mr. and Mrs. Robinson reside
here?”

The porter was a man of few words and apparently of a sour or
suspicious disposition. He hardly looked at us and grunted out:

“No. 4. Second floor.”

“I thank you. Can you tell me how long they have been here?”

“Six months.”

I started forward in amazement, conscious as I did so of Poirot’s
malicious grin.

“Impossible,” I cried. “You must be making a mistake.”

“Six months.”

“Are you sure? The lady I mean is tall and fair with reddish gold
hair and——”

“That’s ’er,” said the porter. “Come in the Michaelmas quarter,
they did. Just six months ago.”

He appeared to lose interest in us and retreated slowly up the
hall. I followed Poirot outside.

“_Eh bien_, Hastings?” my friend demanded slyly. “Are you so sure
now that delightful women always speak the truth?”

I did not reply.

Poirot had steered his way into Brompton Road before I asked him
what he was going to do and where we were going.

“To the house agents, Hastings. I have a great desire to have a
flat in Montagu Mansions. If I am not mistaken, several interesting
things will take place there before long.”

We were fortunate in our quest. No. 8, on the fourth floor, was to
be let furnished at ten guineas a week. Poirot promptly took it
for a month. Outside in the street again, he silenced my protests:

“But I make money nowadays! Why should I not indulge a whim? By
the way, Hastings, have you a revolver?”

“Yes—somewhere,” I answered, slightly thrilled. “Do you think——”

“That you will need it? It is quite possible. The idea pleases you,
I see. Always the spectacular and romantic appeals to you.”

The following day saw us installed in our temporary home. The flat
was pleasantly furnished. It occupied the same position in the
building as that of the Robinsons, but was two floors higher.

The day after our installation was a Sunday. In the afternoon,
Poirot left the front door ajar, and summoned me hastily as a bang
reverberated from somewhere below.

“Look over the banisters. Are those your friends. Do not let them
see you.”

I craned my neck over the staircase.

“That’s them,” I declared in an ungrammatical whisper.

“Good. Wait awhile.”

About half an hour later, a young woman emerged in brilliant and
varied clothing. With a sigh of satisfaction, Poirot tiptoed back
into the flat.

“_C’est ça_. After the master and mistress, the maid. The flat
should now be empty.”

“What are we going to do?” I asked uneasily.

Poirot had trotted briskly into the scullery and was hauling at
the rope of the coal-lift.

“We are about to descend after the method of the dustbins,” he
explained cheerfully. “No one will observe us. The Sunday concert,
the Sunday ‘afternoon out,’ and finally the Sunday nap after the
Sunday dinner of England—_le rosbif_—all these will distract
attention from the doings of Hercule Poirot. Come, my friend.”

He stepped into the rough wooden contrivance and I followed him
gingerly.

“Are we going to break into the flat?” I asked dubiously.

Poirot’s answer was not too reassuring:

“Not precisely to-day,” he replied.

Pulling on the rope, we descended slowly till we reached the second
floor. Poirot uttered an exclamation of satisfaction as he perceived
that the wooden door into the scullery was open.

“You observe? Never do they bolt these doors in the daytime. And
yet anyone could mount or descend as we have done. At night
yes—though not always then—and it is against that that we are going
to make provision.”

He had drawn some tools from his pocket as he spoke, and at once
set deftly to work, his object being to arrange the bolt so that
it could be pulled back from the lift. The operation only occupied
about three minutes. Then Poirot returned the tools to his pocket,
and we reascended once more to our own domain.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


On Monday Poirot was out all day, but when he returned in the
evening he flung himself into his chair with a sigh of satisfaction.

“Hastings, shall I recount to you a little history? A story after
your own heart and which will remind you of your favourite cinema?”

“Go ahead,” I laughed. “I presume that it is a true story, not one
of your efforts of fancy.”

“It is true enough. Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard will vouch for
its accuracy, since it was through his kind offices that it came
to my ears. Listen, Hastings. A little over six months ago some
important Naval plans were stolen from an American Government
department. They showed the position of some of the most important
Harbour defences, and would be worth a considerable sum to any
foreign Government—that of Japan, for example. Suspicion fell upon
a young man named Luigi Valdarno, an Italian by birth, who was
employed in a minor capacity in the Department and who was missing
at the same time as the papers. Whether Luigi Valdarno was the
thief or not, he was found two days later on the East Side in New
York, shot dead. The papers were not on him. Now for some time past
Luigi Valdarno had been going about with a Miss Elsa Hardt, a young
concert singer who had recently appeared and who lived with a
brother in an apartment in Washington. Nothing was known of the
antecedents of Miss Elsa Hardt, and she disappeared suddenly about
the time of Valdarno’s death. There are reasons for believing that
she was in reality an accomplished international spy who has done
much nefarious work under various _aliases_. The American Secret
Service, whilst doing their best to trace her, also kept an eye
upon certain insignificant Japanese gentlemen living in Washington.
They felt pretty certain that, when Elsa Hardt had covered her
tracks sufficiently, she would approach the gentlemen in question.
One of them left suddenly for England a fortnight ago. On the face
of it, therefore, it would seem that Elsa Hardt is in England.”
Poirot paused, and then added softly: “The official description of
Elsa Hardt is: Height 5 ft. 7, eyes blue, hair auburn, fair
complexion, nose straight, no special distinguishing marks.”

“Mrs. Robinson!” I gasped.

“Well, there is a chance of it, anyhow,” amended Poirot. “Also, I
learn that a swarthy man, a foreigner of some kind, was inquiring
about the occupants of No. 4 only this morning. Therefore, _mon
ami_, I fear that you must forswear your beauty sleep to-night,
and join me in my all-night vigil in the flat below—armed with that
excellent revolver of yours, _bien entendu_!”

“Rather,” I cried with enthusiasm. “When shall we start?”

“The hour of midnight is both solemn and suitable, I fancy. Nothing
is likely to occur before then.”

At twelve o’clock precisely, we crept cautiously into the coal-lift
and lowered ourselves to the second floor. Under Poirot’s
manipulation, the wooden door quickly swung inwards, and we climbed
into the flat. From the scullery we passed into the kitchen where
we established ourselves comfortably in two chairs with the door
into the hall ajar.

“Now we have but to wait,” said Poirot contentedly, closing his
eyes.

To me, the waiting appeared endless. I was terrified of going to
sleep. Just when it seemed to me that I had been there about eight
hours—and had, as I found out afterwards, in reality been exactly
one hour and twenty minutes—a faint scratching sound came to my
ears. Poirot’s hand touched mine. I rose, and together we moved
carefully in the direction of the hall. The noise came from there.
Poirot placed his lips to my ear.

“Outside the front door. They are cutting out the lock. When I give
the word, not before, fall upon him from behind and hold him fast.
Be careful, he will have a knife.”

Presently there was a rending sound, and a little circle of light
appeared through the door. It was extinguished immediately and then
the door was slowly opened. Poirot and I flattened ourselves
against the wall. I heard a man’s breathing as he passed us. Then
he flashed on his torch, and as he did so, Poirot hissed in my ear:

“_Allez_.”

We sprang together, Poirot with a quick movement enveloped the
intruder’s head with a light woollen scarf whilst I pinioned his
arms. The whole affair was quick and noiseless. I twisted a dagger
from his hand, and as Poirot brought down the scarf from his eyes,
whilst keeping it wound tightly round his mouth, I jerked up my
revolver where he could see it and understand that resistance was
useless. As he ceased to struggle Poirot put his mouth close to
his ear and began to whisper rapidly. After a minute the man
nodded. Then enjoining silence with a movement of the hand, Poirot
led the way out of the flat and down the stairs. Our captive
followed, and I brought up the rear with the revolver. When we were
out in the street, Poirot turned to me.

“There is a taxi waiting just round the corner. Give me the
revolver. We shall not need it now.”

“But if this fellow tries to escape?”

Poirot smiled.

“He will not.”

I returned in a minute with the waiting taxi. The scarf had been
unwound from the stranger’s face, and I gave a start of surprise.

“He’s not a Jap,” I ejaculated in a whisper to Poirot.

“Observation was always your strong point, Hastings! Nothing
escapes you. No, the man is not a Jap. He is an Italian.”

We got into the taxi, and Poirot gave the driver an address in St.
John’s Wood. I was by now completely fogged. I did not like to ask
Poirot where we were going in front of our captive, and strove in
vain to obtain some light upon the proceedings.

We alighted at the door of a small house standing back from the
road. A returning wayfarer, slightly drunk, was lurching along the
pavement and almost collided with Poirot, who said something
sharply to him which I did not catch. All three of us went up the
steps of the house. Poirot rang the bell and motioned us to stand
a little aside. There was no answer and he rang again and then
seized the knocker which he plied for some minutes vigorously.

A light appeared suddenly above the fanlight, and the door was
opened cautiously a little way.

“What the devil do you want?” a man’s voice demanded harshly.

“I want the doctor. My wife is taken ill.”

“There’s no doctor here.”

The man prepared to shut the door, but Poirot thrust his foot in
adroitly. He became suddenly a perfect caricature of an infuriated
Frenchman.

“What you say, there is no doctor? I will have the law of you. You
must come! I will stay here and ring and knock all night.”

“My dear sir——” The door was opened again, the man, clad in a
dressing-gown and slippers, stepped forward to pacify Poirot with
an uneasy glance round.

“I will call the police.”

Poirot prepared to descend the steps.

“No, don’t do that for Heaven’s sake!” The man dashed after him.

With a neat push Poirot sent him staggering down the steps. In
another minute all three of us were inside the door and it was
pushed to and bolted.

“Quick—in here.” Poirot led the way into the nearest room switching
on the light as he did so. “And you—behind the curtain.”

“Si, signor,” said the Italian and slid rapidly behind the full
folds of rose-coloured velvet which draped the embrasure of the
window.

Not a minute too soon. Just as he disappeared from view a woman
rushed into the room. She was tall with reddish hair and held a
scarlet kimono round her slender form.

“Where is my husband?” she cried, with a quick frightened glance.
“Who are you?”

Poirot stepped forward with a bow.

“It is to be hoped your husband will not suffer from a chill. I
observed that he had slippers on his feet, and that his dressing-gown
was a warm one.”

“Who are you? What are you doing in my house?”

“It is true that none of us have the pleasure of your acquaintance,
madame. It is especially to be regretted as one of our number has
come specially from New York in order to meet you.”

The curtains parted and the Italian stepped out. To my horror I
observed that he was brandishing my revolver, which Poirot must
doubtless have put down through inadvertence in the cab.

The woman gave a piercing scream and turned to fly, but Poirot was
standing in front of the closed door.

“Let me by,” she shrieked. “He will murder me.”

“Who was it dat croaked Luigi Valdarno?” asked the Italian hoarsely,
brandishing the weapon, and sweeping each one of us with it. We
dared not move.

“My God, Poirot, this is awful. What shall we do?” I cried.

“You will oblige me by refraining from talking so much, Hastings.
I can assure you that our friend will not shoot until I give the
word.”

“Youse sure o’ dat, eh?” said the Italian, leering unpleasantly.

It was more than I was, but the woman turned to Poirot like a
flash.

“What is it you want?”

Poirot bowed.

“I do not think it is necessary to insult Miss Elsa Hardt’s
intelligence by telling her.”

With a swift movement, the woman snatched up a big black velvet
cat which served as a cover for the telephone.

“They are stitched in the lining of that.”

“Clever,” murmured Poirot appreciatively. He stood aside from the
door. “Good evening, madame. I will detain your friend from New
York whilst you make your getaway.”

“Whatta fool!” roared the big Italian, and raising the revolver he
fired point-blank at the woman’s retreating figure just as I flung
myself upon him.

But the weapon merely clicked harmlessly and Poirot’s voice rose
in mild reproof.

“Never will you trust your old friend, Hastings. I do not care for
my friends to carry loaded pistols about with them and never would
I permit a mere acquaintance to do so. No, no, _mon ami_.” This to
the Italian who swearing hoarsely. Poirot continued to address him
in a tone of mild reproof: “See now, what I have done for you. I
have saved you from being hanged. And do not think that our
beautiful lady will escape. No, no, the house is watched, back and
front. Straight into the arms of the police they will go. Is not
that a beautiful and consoling thought? Yes, you may leave the room
now. But be careful—be very careful. I——Ah, he is gone! And my
friend Hastings looks at me with eyes of reproach. But it was all
so simple! It was clear, from the first, that out of several
hundred, probably, applicants for No. 4, Montagu Mansions only the
Robinsons were considered suitable. Why? What was there that
singled them out from the rest—at practically a glance. Their
appearance? Possibly, but it was not so unusual. Their name, then!”

“But there’s nothing unusual about the name of Robinson,” I cried.
“It’s quite a common name.”

“Ah! _Sapristi_, but exactly! That was the point. Elsa Hardt and
her husband, or brother or whatever he really is, come from New
York, and take a flat in the name of Mr. and Mrs. Robinson. Suddenly
they learn that one of these secret societies, the Mafia, or the
Camorra, to which doubtless Luigi Valdarno belonged, is on their
track. What do they do? They hit on a scheme of transparent
simplicity. Evidently they knew that their pursuers were not
personally acquainted with either of them. What then can be simpler?
They offer the flat at an absurdly low rental. Of the thousands of
young couples in London looking for flats, there cannot fail to be
several Robinsons. It is only a matter of waiting. If you will look
at the name of Robinson in the telephone directory, you will
realize that a fair-haired Mrs. Robinson was pretty sure to come
along sooner or later. Then what will happen? The avenger arrives.
He knows the name, he knows the address. He strikes! All is over,
vengeance is satisfied, and Miss Elsa Hardt has escaped by the skin
of her teeth once more. By the way, Hastings, you must present me
to the real Mrs. Robinson—that delightful and truthful creature!
What will they think when they find their flat has been broken
into! We must hurry back. Ah, that sounds like Japp and his friends
arriving.”

A mighty tattoo sounded on the knocker.

“How did you know this address?” I asked as I followed Poirot out
into the hall. “Oh, of course, you had the first Mrs. Robinson
followed when she left the other flat.”

“_A la bonne heure_, Hastings. You use your grey cells at last.
Now for a little surprise for Japp.”

Softly unbolting the door, he stuck the cat’s head round the edge
and ejaculated a piercing “Miaow.”

The Scotland Yard inspector, who was standing outside with another
man, jumped in spite of himself.

“Oh, it’s only Monsieur Poirot at one of his little jokes!” he
exclaimed, as Poirot’s head followed that of the cat. “Let us in,
moosior.”

“You have our friends safe and sound?”

“Yes, we’ve got the birds all right. But they hadn’t got the goods
with them.”

“I see. So you come to search. Well, I am about to depart with
Hastings, but I should like to give you a little lecture upon the
history and habits of the domestic cat.”

“For the Lord’s sake, have you gone completely balmy?”

“The cat,” declaimed Poirot, “was worshipped by the ancient
Egyptians. It is still regarded as a symbol of good luck if a black
cat crosses your path. This cat crossed your path to-night, Japp.
To speak of the interior of any animal or any person is not, I
know, considered polite in England. But the interior of this cat
is perfectly delicate. I refer to the lining.”

With a sudden grunt, the second man seized the cat from Poirot’s
hand.

“Oh, I forgot to introduce you,” said Japp. “Mr. Poirot, this is
Mr. Burt of the United States Secret Service.”

The American’s trained fingers had felt what he was looking for.
He held out his hand, and for a moment speech failed him. Then he
rose to the occasion.

“Pleased to meet you,” said Mr. Burt.




  IV


  The Mystery of Hunter’s Lodge


“After all,” murmured Poirot, “it is possible that I shall not die
this time.”

Coming from a convalescent influenza patient, I hailed the remark
as showing a beneficial optimism. I myself had been the first
sufferer from the disease. Poirot in his turn had gone down. He
was now sitting up in bed, propped up with pillows, his head
muffled in a woollen shawl, and was slowly sipping a particularly
noxious tisane which I had prepared according to his directions.
His eye rested with pleasure upon a neatly graduated row of medicine
bottles which adorned the mantelpiece.

“Yes, yes,” my little friend continued. “Once more shall I be
myself again, the great Hercule Poirot, the terror of evil-doers!
Figure to yourself, _mon ami_, that I have a little paragraph to
myself in _Society Gossip_. But yes! Here it is! ‘Go it—criminals—all
out! Hercule Poirot—and believe me, girls, he’s some Hercules!—our
own pet society detective can’t get a grip on you. ’Cause why?
’Cause he’s got _la grippe_ himself’!”

I laughed.

“Good for you, Poirot. You are becoming quite a public character.
And fortunately you haven’t missed anything of particular interest
during this time.”

“That is true. The few cases I have had to decline did not fill me
with any regret.”

Our landlady stuck her head in at the door.

“There’s a gentleman downstairs. Says he must see Monsieur Poirot
or you, Captain. Seeing as he was in a great to-do—and with all
that quite the gentleman—I brought up ’is card.”

She handed me the bit of pasteboard. “Mr. Roger Havering,” I read.

Poirot motioned with his head towards the bookcase, and I obediently
pulled forth “Who’s Who.” Poirot took it from me and scanned the
pages rapidly.

“Second son of fifth Baron Windsor. Married 1913 Zoe, fourth
daughter of William Crabb.”

“H’m!” I said. “I rather fancy that’s the girl who used to act at
the Frivolity—only she called herself Zoe Carrisbrook. I remember
she married some young man about town just before the War.”

“Would it interest you, Hastings, to go down and hear what our
visitor’s particular little trouble is? Make him all my excuses.”

Roger Havering was a man of about forty, well set up and of smart
appearance. His face, however, was haggard, and he was evidently
labouring under great agitation.

“Captain Hastings? You are Monsieur Poirot’s partner, I understand.
It is imperative that he should come with me to Derbyshire to-day.”

“I’m afraid that’s impossible,” I replied. “Poirot is ill in
bed—influenza.”

His face fell.

“Dear me, that is a great blow to me.”

“The matter on which you want to consult him is serious?”

“My God, yes! My uncle, the best friend I have in the world, was
foully murdered last night.”

“Here in London?”

“No, in Derbyshire. I was in town and received a telegram from my
wife this morning. Immediately upon its receipt I determined to
come round and beg Monsieur Poirot to undertake the case.”

“If you will excuse me a minute,” I said, struck by a sudden idea.

I rushed upstairs, and in a few brief words acquainted Poirot with
the situation. He took any further words out of my mouth.

“I see. I see. You want to go yourself, is it not so? Well, why
not? You should know my methods by now. All I ask is that you
should report to me fully every day, and follow implicitly any
instructions I may wire you.”

To this I willingly agreed.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


An hour later I was sitting opposite Mr. Havering in a first-class
carriage on the Midland Railway, speeding rapidly away from London.

“To begin with, Captain Hastings, you must understand that Hunter’s
Lodge, where we are going, and where the tragedy took place, is
only a small shooting-box in the heart of the Derbyshire moors.
Our real home is near Newmarket, and we usually rent a flat in town
for the season. Hunter’s Lodge is looked after by a housekeeper
who is quite capable of doing all we need when we run down for an
occasional week-end. Of course, during the shooting season, we take
down some of our own servants from Newmarket. My uncle, Mr.
Harrington Pace (as you may know, my mother was a Miss Pace of New
York), has, for the last three years, made his home with us. He
never got on well with my father, or my elder brother, and I
suspect that my being somewhat of a prodigal son myself rather
increased than diminished his affection towards me. Of course I am
a poor man, and my uncle was a rich one—in other words, he paid
the piper! But, though exacting in many ways, he was not really
hard to get on with, and we all three lived very harmoniously
together. Two days ago my uncle, rather wearied with some recent
gaieties of ours in town, suggested that we should run down to
Derbyshire for a day or two. My wife telegraphed to Mrs. Middleton,
the housekeeper, and we went down that same afternoon. Yesterday
evening I was forced to return to town, but my wife and my uncle
remained on. This morning I received this telegram.” He handed it
over to me:

“Come at once uncle Harrington murdered last night bring good
detective if you can but do come—Zoe.”

“Then, as yet you know no details?”

“No, I suppose it will be in the evening papers. Without doubt the
police are in charge.”

It was about three o’clock when we arrived at the little station
of Elmer’s Dale. From there a five-mile drive brought us to a small
grey stone building in the midst of the rugged moors.

“A lonely place,” I observed with a shiver.

Havering nodded.

“I shall try and get rid of it. I could never live here again.”

We unlatched the gate and were walking up the narrow path to the
oak door when a familiar figure emerged and came to meet us.

“Japp!” I ejaculated.

The Scotland Yard inspector grinned at me in a friendly fashion
before addressing my companion.

“Mr. Havering, I think? I’ve been sent down from London to take
charge of this case, and I’d like a word with you, if I may, sir.”

“My wife——”

“I’ve seen your good lady, sir—and the housekeeper. I won’t keep
you a moment, but I’m anxious to get back to the village now that
I’ve seen all there is to see here.”

“I know nothing as yet as to what——”

“Ex-actly,” said Japp soothingly. “But there are just one or two
little points I’d like your opinion about all the same. Captain
Hastings here, he knows me, and he’ll go on up to the house and
tell them you’re coming. What have you done with the little man,
by the way, Captain Hastings?”

“He’s ill in bed with influenza.”

“Is he now? I’m sorry to hear that. Rather the case of the cart
without the horse, your being here without him, isn’t it?”

And on his rather ill-timed jest I went on to the house. I rang
the bell, as Japp had closed the door behind him. After some
moments it was opened to me by a middle-aged woman in black.

“Mr. Havering will be here in a moment,” I explained. “He has been
detained by the inspector. I have come down with him from London
to look into the case. Perhaps you can tell me briefly what occurred
last night.”

“Come inside, sir.” She closed the door behind me, and we stood in
the dimly-lighted hall. “It was after dinner last night, sir, that
the man came. He asked to see Mr. Pace, sir, and, seeing that he
spoke the same way, I thought it was an American gentleman friend
of Mr. Pace’s and I showed him into the gun-room, and then went to
tell Mr. Pace. He wouldn’t give any name, which, of course, was a
bit odd, now I come to think of it. I told Mr. Pace, and he seemed
puzzled like, but he said to the mistress: ‘Excuse me, Zoe, while
I just see what this fellow wants.’ He went off to the gun-room,
and I went back to the kitchen, but after a while I heard loud
voices, as if they were quarrelling, and I came out into the hall.
At the same time, the mistress she comes out too, and just then
there was a shot and then a dreadful silence. We both ran to the
gun-room door, but it was locked and we had to go round to the
window. It was open, and there inside was Mr. Pace, all shot and
bleeding.”

“What became of the man?”

“He must have got away through the window, sir, before we got to
it.”

“And then?”

“Mrs. Havering sent me to fetch the police. Five miles to walk it
was. They came back with me, and the constable he stayed all night,
and this morning the police gentleman from London arrived.”

“What was this man like who called to see Mr. Pace?”

The housekeeper reflected.

“He had a black beard, sir, and was about middle-aged, and had on
a light overcoat. Beyond the fact that he spoke like an American
I didn’t notice much about him.”

“I see. Now I wonder if I can see Mrs. Havering?”

“She’s upstairs, sir. Shall I tell her?”

“If you please. Tell her that Mr. Havering is outside with Inspector
Japp, and that the gentleman he has brought back with him from
London is anxious to speak to her as soon as possible.”

“Very good, sir.”

I was in a fever of impatience to get at all the facts. Japp had
two or three hours’ start of me, and his anxiety to be gone made
me keen to be close at his heels.

Mrs. Havering did not keep me waiting long. In a few minutes I
heard a light step descending the stairs, and looked up to see a
very handsome young woman coming towards me. She wore a
flame-coloured jumper, that set off the slender boyishness of her
figure. On her dark head was a little hat of flame-coloured leather.
Even the present tragedy could not dim the vitality of her
personality.

I introduced myself, and she nodded in quick comprehension.

“Of course I have often heard of you and your colleague, Monsieur
Poirot. You have done some wonderful things together, haven’t you?
It was very clever of my husband to get you so promptly. Now will
you ask me questions? That is the easiest way, isn’t it, of getting
to know all you want to about this dreadful affair?”

“Thank you, Mrs. Havering. Now what time was it that this man
arrived?”

“It must have been just before nine o’clock. We had finished
dinner, and were sitting over our coffee and cigarettes.”

“Your husband had already left for London?”

“Yes, he went up by the 6.15.”

“Did he go by car to the station, or did he walk?”

“Our own car isn’t down here. One came out from the garage in
Elmer’s Dale to fetch him in time for the train.”

“Was Mr. Pace quite his usual self?”

“Absolutely. Most normal in every way.”

“Now, can you describe this visitor at all?”

“I’m afraid not. I didn’t see him. Mrs. Middleton showed him
straight into the gun-room and then came to tell my uncle.”

“What did your uncle say?”

“He seemed rather annoyed, but went off at once. It was about five
minutes later that I heard the sound of raised voices. I ran out
into the hall and almost collided with Mrs. Middleton. Then we
heard the shot. The gun-room door was locked on the inside, and we
had to go right round the house to the window. Of course that took
some time, and the murderer had been able to get well away. My poor
uncle”—her voice faltered—“had been shot through the head. I saw
at once that he was dead. I sent Mrs. Middleton for the police. I
was careful to touch nothing in the room but to leave it exactly
as I found it.”

I nodded approval.

“Now, as to the weapon?”

“Well, I can make a guess at it, Captain Hastings. A pair of
revolvers of my husband’s were mounted upon the wall. One of them
is missing. I pointed this out to the police, and they took the
other one away with them. When they have extracted the bullet, I
suppose they will know for certain.”

“May I go to the gun-room?”

“Certainly. The police have finished with it. But the body has been
removed.”

She accompanied me to the scene of the crime. At that moment Havering
entered the hall, and with a quick apology his wife ran to him. I
was left to undertake my investigations alone.

I may as well confess at once that they were rather disappointing.
In detective novels clues abound, but here I could find nothing
that struck me as out of the ordinary except a large bloodstain on
the carpet where I judged the dead man had fallen. I examined
everything with painstaking care and took a couple of pictures of
the room with my little camera which I had brought with me. I also
examined the ground outside the window, but it appeared to have
been so heavily trampled underfoot that I judged it was useless to
waste time over it. No, I had seen all that Hunter’s Lodge had to
show me. I must go back to Elmer’s Dale and get into touch with
Japp. Accordingly I took leave of the Haverings, and was driven
off in the car that had brought us up from the station.

I found Japp at the Matlock Arms and he took me forthwith to see
the body. Harrington Pace was a small, spare clean-shaven man,
typically American in appearance. He had been shot through the back
of the head, and the revolver had been discharged at close quarters.

“Turned away for a moment,” remarked Japp, “and the other fellow
snatched up a revolver and shot him. The one Mrs. Havering handed
over to us was fully loaded and I suppose the other one was also.
Curious what darn fool things people do. Fancy keeping two loaded
revolvers hanging up on your wall.”

“What do you think of the case?” I asked, as we left the gruesome
chamber behind us.

“Well, I’d got my eye on Havering to begin with. Oh, yes!” noting
my exclamation of astonishment. “Havering has one or two shady
incidents in his past. When he was a boy at Oxford there was some
funny business about the signature on one of his father’s cheques.
All hushed up of course. Then, he’s pretty heavily in debt now,
and they’re the kind of debts he wouldn’t like to go to his uncle
about, whereas you may be sure the uncle’s will would be in his
favour. Yes, I’d got my eye on him, and that’s why I wanted to
speak to him before he saw his wife, but their statements dovetail
all right, and I’ve been to the station and there’s no doubt
whatever that he left by the 6.15. That gets up to London about
10.30. He went straight to his club, he says, and if that’s
confirmed all right—why, he couldn’t have been shooting his uncle
here at nine o’clock in a black beard!”

“Ah, yes, I was going to ask you what you thought about that
beard?”

Japp winked.

“I think it grew pretty fast—grew in the five miles from Elmer’s
Dale to Hunter’s Lodge. Americans that I’ve met are mostly
clean-shaven. Yes, it’s amongst Mr. Pace’s American associates that
we’ll have to look for the murderer. I questioned the housekeeper
first, and then her mistress, and their stories agree all right,
but I’m sorry Mrs. Havering didn’t get a look at the fellow. She’s
a smart woman, and she might have noticed something that would set
us on the track.”

I sat down and wrote a minute and lengthy account to Poirot. I was
able to add various further items of information before I posted
the letter.

The bullet had been extracted and was proved to have been fired
from a revolver identical with the one held by the police.
Furthermore, Mr. Havering’s movements on the night in question had
been checked and verified, and it was proved beyond doubt that he
had actually arrived in London by the train in question. And,
thirdly, a sensational development had occurred. A city gentleman,
living at Ealing, on crossing Haven Green to get to the District
Railway Station that morning, had observed a brown-paper parcel
stuck between the railings. Opening it, he found that it contained
a revolver. He handed the parcel over to the local police station,
and before night it was proved to be the one we were in search of,
the fellow to that given us by Mrs. Havering. One bullet had been
fired from it.

All this I added to my report. A wire from Poirot arrived whilst
I was at breakfast the following morning:

“Of course black bearded man was not Havering only you or Japp
would have such an idea wire me description of housekeeper and what
clothes she wore this morning same of Mrs. Havering do not waste
time taking photographs of interiors they are underexposed and not
in the least artistic.”

It seemed to me that Poirot’s style was unnecessarily facetious.
I also fancied he was a shade jealous of my position on the spot
with full facilities for handling the case. His request for a
description of the clothes worn by the two women appeared to me to
be simply ridiculous, but I complied as well as I, a mere man, was
able to.

At eleven a reply wire came from Poirot:

“Advise Japp arrest housekeeper before it is too late.”

Dumbfounded, I took the wire to Japp. He swore softly under his
breath.

“He’s the goods, Monsieur Poirot! If he says so, there’s something
in it. And I hardly noticed the woman. I don’t know that I can go
so far as arresting her, but I’ll have her watched. We’ll go up
right away, and take another look at her.”

But it was too late. Mrs. Middleton, that quiet middle-aged woman,
who had appeared so normal and respectable, had vanished into thin
air. Her box had been left behind. It contained only ordinary
wearing apparel. There was no clue in it to her identity, or as to
her whereabouts.

From Mrs. Havering we elicited all the facts we could:

“I engaged her about three weeks ago when Mrs. Emery, our former
housekeeper, left. She came to me from Mrs. Selbourne’s Agency in
Mount Street—a very well-known place. I get all my servants from
there. They sent several women to see me, but this Mrs. Middleton
seemed much the nicest, and had splendid references. I engaged her
on the spot, and notified the Agency of the fact. I can’t believe
that there was anything wrong with her. She was such a nice quiet
woman.”

The thing was certainly a mystery. Whilst it was clear that the
woman herself could not have committed the crime, since at the
moment the shot was fired Mrs. Havering was with her in the hall,
nevertheless she must have some connection with the murder, or why
should she suddenly take to her heels and bolt?

I wired the latest development to Poirot and suggested returning
to London and making inquiries at Selbourne’s Agency.

Poirot’s reply was prompt:

“Useless to inquire at agency they will never have heard of her
find out what vehicle took her up to hunters lodge when she first
arrived there.”

Though mystified, I was obedient. The means of transport in Elmer’s
Dale were limited. The local garage had two battered Ford cars,
and there were two station flies. None of these had been
requisitioned on the date in question. Questioned, Mrs. Havering
explained that she had given the woman the money for her fare down
to Derbyshire and sufficient to hire a car or fly to take her up
to Hunter’s Lodge. There was usually one of the Fords at the
station on the chance of its being required. Taking into
consideration the further fact that nobody at the station had
noticed the arrival of a stranger, black-bearded or otherwise, on
the fatal evening, everything seemed to point to the conclusion
that the murderer had come to the spot in a car, which had been
waiting near at hand to aid his escape, and that the same car had
brought the mysterious housekeeper to her new post. I may mention
that inquiries at the Agency in London bore out Poirot’s
prognostication. No such woman as “Mrs. Middleton” had ever been
on their books. They had received the Hon. Mrs. Havering’s
application for a housekeeper, and had sent her various applicants
for the post. When she sent them the engagement fee, she omitted
to mention which woman she had selected.

Somewhat crestfallen, I returned to London. I found Poirot
established in an arm-chair by the fire in a garish, silk
dressing-gown. He greeted me with much affection.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings! But how glad I am to see you. Veritably I have
for you a great affection. And you have enjoyed yourself? You have
run to and fro with the good Japp? You have interrogated and
investigated to your heart’s content?”

“Poirot,” I cried, “the thing’s a dark mystery! It will never be
solved.”

“It is true that we are not likely to cover ourselves with glory
over it.”

“No, indeed. It’s a hard nut to crack.”

“Oh, as far as that goes, I am very good at cracking the nuts! A
veritable squirrel! It is not that which embarrasses me. I know
well enough who killed Mr. Harrington Pace.”

“You know? How did you find out?”

“Your illuminating answers to my wires supplied me with the truth.
See here, Hastings, let us examine the facts methodically and in
order. Mr. Harrington Pace is a man with a considerable fortune
which at his death will doubtless pass to his nephew. Point No. 1.
His nephew is known to be desperately hard up. Point No. 2. His
nephew is also known to be—shall we say a man of rather loose
moral fibre? Point No. 3.”

“But Roger Havering is proved to have journeyed straight up to
London.”

“_Précisément_—and therefore, as Mr. Havering left Elmer’s Dale at
6.15, and since Mr. Pace cannot have been killed before he left,
or the doctor would have spotted the time of the crime as being
given wrongly when he examined the body, we conclude quite rightly,
that Mr. Havering did not shoot his uncle. But there is a Mrs.
Havering, Hastings.”

“Impossible! The housekeeper was with her when the shot was fired.”

“Ah, yes, the housekeeper. But she has disappeared.”

“She will be found.”

“I think not. There is something peculiarly elusive about that
housekeeper, don’t you think so, Hastings? It struck me at once.”

“She played her part, I suppose, and then got out in the nick of
time.”

“And what was her part?”

“Well, presumably to admit her confederate, the black-bearded man.”

“Oh, no, that was not her part! Her part was what you have just
mentioned, to provide an alibi for Mrs. Havering at the moment the
shot was fired. And no one will ever find her, _mon ami_, because
she does not exist! ‘There’s no sech person,’ as your so great
Shakespeare says.”

“It was Dickens,” I murmured, unable to suppress a smile. “But what
do you mean, Poirot?”

“I mean that Zoe Havering was an actress before her marriage, that
you and Japp only saw the housekeeper in a dark hall, a dim
middle-aged figure in black with a faint subdued voice, and finally
that neither you nor Japp, nor the local police whom the housekeeper
fetched, ever saw Mrs. Middleton and her mistress at one and the
same time. It was child’s play for that clever and daring woman.
On the pretext of summoning her mistress, she runs upstairs, slips
on a bright jumper and a hat with black curls attached which she
jams down over the grey transformation. A few deft touches, and
the make-up is removed, a slight dusting of rouge, and the brilliant
Zoe Havering comes down with her clear ringing voice. Nobody looks
particularly at the housekeeper. Why should they? There is nothing
to connect her with the crime. She, too, has an alibi.”

“But the revolver that was found at Ealing? Mrs. Havering could
not have placed it there?”

“No, that was Roger Havering’s job—but it was a mistake on their
part. It put me on the right track. A man who has committed a
murder with a revolver which he found on the spot would fling it
away at once, he would not carry it up to London with him. No, the
motive was clear, the criminals wished to focus the interest of
the police on a spot far removed from Derbyshire they were anxious
to get the police away as soon as possible from the vicinity of
Hunter’s Lodge. Of course the revolver found at Ealing was not the
one with which Mr. Pace was shot. Roger Havering discharged one
shot from it, brought it up to London, went straight to his club
to establish his alibi, then went quickly out to Ealing by the
district, a matter of about twenty minutes only, placed the parcel
where it was found and so back to town. That charming creature,
his wife, quietly shoots Mr. Pace after dinner—you remember he was
shot from behind? Another significant point, that!—reloads the
revolver and puts it back in its place, and then starts off with
her desperate little comedy.”

“It’s incredible,” I murmured, fascinated, “and yet——”

“And yet it is true. _Bien sur_, my friend, it is true. But to
bring that precious pair to justice, that is another matter. Well,
Japp must do what he can—I have written him fully—but I very much
fear, Hastings, that we shall be obliged to leave them to Fate, or
_le bon Dieu_, whichever you prefer.”

“The wicked flourish like a green bay tree,” I reminded him.

“But at a price, Hastings, always at a price, _croyez-moi!_”

Poirot’s forebodings were confirmed. Japp, though convinced of the
truth of his theory, was unable to get together the necessary
evidence to ensure a conviction.

Mr. Pace’s huge fortune passed into the hands of his murderers.
Nevertheless, Nemesis did overtake them, and when I read in the
paper that the Hon. Roger and Mrs. Havering were amongst those
killed in the crashing of the Air Mail to Paris I knew that Justice
was satisfied.




  V

  The Million Dollar Bond Robbery

“What a number of bond robberies there have been lately!” I observed
one morning, laying aside the newspaper. “Poirot, let us forsake
the science of detection, and take to crime instead!”

“You are on the—how do you say it?—get-rich-quick tack, eh, _mon
ami_?”

“Well, look at this last _coup_, the million dollars’ worth of
Liberty Bonds which the London and Scottish Bank were sending to
New York, and which disappeared in such a remarkable manner on
board the _Olympia_.”

“If it were not for the _mal de mer_, and the difficulty of
practising the so excellent method of Laverguier for a longer time
than the few hours of crossing the channel, I should delight to
voyage myself on one of these big liners,” murmured Poirot dreamily.

“Yes, indeed,” I said enthusiastically. “Some of them must be
perfect palaces; the swimming-baths, the lounges, the restaurant,
the palm courts—really, it must be hard to believe that one is on
the sea.”

“Me, I always know when I am on the sea,” said Poirot sadly. “And
all those bagatelles that you enumerate, they say nothing to me;
but, my friend, consider for a moment the geniuses that travel as
it were incognito! On board these floating palaces, as you so
justly call them, one would meet the élite, the _haute noblesse_
of the criminal world!”

I laughed.

“So that’s the way your enthusiasm runs! You would have liked to
cross swords with the man who sneaked the Liberty Bonds?”

The landlady interrupted us.

“A young lady as wants to see you, Mr. Poirot. Here’s her card.”

The card bore the inscription: Miss Esmée Farquhar, and Poirot,
after diving under the table to retrieve a stray crumb, and putting
it carefully in the waste-paper-basket, nodded to the landlady to
admit her.

In another minute one of the most charming girls I have ever seen
was ushered into the room. She was perhaps about five-and-twenty,
with big brown eyes and a perfect figure. She was well-dressed and
perfectly composed in manner.

“Sit down, I beg of you, mademoiselle. This is my friend, Captain
Hastings, who aids me in my little problems.”

“I am afraid it is a big problem I have brought you to-day, Monsieur
Poirot,” said the girl, giving me a pleasant bow as she seated
herself. “I dare say you have read about it in the papers. I am
referring to the theft of Liberty Bonds on the _Olympia_.” Some
astonishment must have shown itself in Poirot’s face, for she
continued quickly: “You are doubtless asking yourself what I have
to do with a grave institution like the London and Scottish Bank.
In one sense nothing, in another sense everything. You see, Monsieur
Poirot, I am engaged to Mr. Philip Ridgeway.”

“Aha! and Mr. Philip Ridgeway——”

“Was in charge of the bonds when they were stolen. Of course no
actual blame can attach to him, it was not his fault in any way.
Nevertheless, he is half distraught over the matter, and his uncle,
I know, insists that he must carelessly have mentioned having them
in his possession. It is a terrible set-back in his career.”

“Who is his uncle?”

“Mr. Vavasour, joint general manager of the London and Scottish
Bank.”

“Suppose, Miss Farquhar, that you recount to me the whole story?”

“Very well. As you know, the Bank wished to extend their credits
in America, and for this purpose decided to send over a million
dollars in Liberty Bonds. Mr. Vavasour selected his nephew, who
had occupied a position of trust in the Bank for many years and
who was conversant with all the details of the Bank’s dealings in
New York, to make the trip. The Olympia sailed from Liverpool on
the 23rd, and the bonds were handed over to Philip on the morning
of that day by Mr. Vavasour and Mr. Shaw, the two joint general
managers of the London and Scottish Bank. They were counted,
enclosed in a package, and sealed in his presence, and he then
locked the package at once in his portmanteau.”

“A portmanteau with an ordinary lock?”

“No, Mr. Shaw insisted on a special lock being fitted to it by
Hubbs’s. Philip, as I say, placed the package at the bottom of the
trunk. It was stolen just a few hours before reaching New York. A
rigorous search of the whole ship was made, but without result.
The bonds seemed literally to have vanished into thin air.”

Poirot made a grimace.

“But they did not vanish absolutely, since I gather that they were
sold in small parcels within half an hour of the docking of the
_Olympia_! Well, undoubtedly the next thing is for me to see Mr.
Ridgeway.”

“I was about to suggest that you should lunch with me at the
‘Cheshire Cheese.’ Philip will be there. He is meeting me, but does
not yet know that I have been consulting you on his behalf.”

We agreed to this suggestion readily enough, and drove there in a
taxi.

Mr. Philip Ridgeway was there before us, and looked somewhat
surprised to see his fiancée arriving with two complete strangers.
He was a nice-looking young fellow, tall and spruce, with a touch
of greying hair at the temples, though he could not have been much
over thirty.

Miss Farquhar went up to him and laid her hand on his arm.

“You must forgive my acting without consulting you, Philip,” she
said. “Let me introduce you to Monsieur Hercule Poirot, of whom
you must often have heard, and his friend, Captain Hastings.”

Ridgeway looked very astonished.

“Of course I have heard of you, Monsieur Poirot,” he said, as he
shook hands. “But I had no idea that Esmée was thinking of
consulting you about my—our trouble.”

“I was afraid you would not let me do it, Philip,” said Miss
Farquhar meekly.

“So you took care to be on the safe side,” he observed, with a
smile. “I hope Monsieur Poirot will be able to throw some light on
this extraordinary puzzle, for I confess frankly that I am nearly
out of my mind with worry and anxiety about it.”

Indeed, his face looked drawn and haggard and showed only too
clearly the strain under which he was labouring.

“Well, well,” said Poirot. “Let us lunch, and over lunch we will
put our heads together and see what can be done. I want to hear
Mr. Ridgeway’s story from his own lips.”

Whilst we discussed the excellent steak and kidney pudding of the
establishment, Philip Ridgeway narrated the circumstances leading
to the disappearance of the bonds. His story agreed with that of
Miss Farquhar in every particular. When he had finished, Poirot
took up the thread with a question.

“What exactly led you to discover that the bonds had been stolen,
Mr. Ridgeway?”

He laughed rather bitterly.

“The thing stared me in the face, Monsieur Poirot. I couldn’t have
missed it. My cabin trunk was half out from under the bunk and all
scratched and cut about where they’d tried to force the lock.”

“But I understood that it had been opened with a key?”

“That’s so. They tried to force it, but couldn’t. And, in the end,
they must have got it unlocked somehow or other.”

“Curious,” said Poirot, his eyes beginning to flicker with the
green light I knew so well. “Very curious! They waste much, much
time trying to prise it open, and then—_sapristi!_ they find that
they have the key all the time—for each of Hubbs’s locks are
unique.”

“That’s just why they couldn’t have had the key. It never left me
day or night.”

“You are sure of that?”

“I can swear to it, and besides, if they had had the key or a
duplicate, why should they waste time trying to force an obviously
unforceable lock?”

“Ah! there is exactly the question we are asking ourselves! I
venture to prophesy that the solution, if we ever find it, will
hinge on that curious fact. I beg of you not to assault me if I
ask you one more question: _Are you perfectly certain you did not
leave the trunk unlocked?_”

Philip Ridgeway merely looked at him, and Poirot gesticulated
apologetically.

“Ah, but these things can happen, I assure you! Very well, the
bonds were stolen from the trunk. What did the thief do with them?
How did he manage to get ashore with them?”

“Ah!” cried Ridgeway. “That’s just it. How? Word was passed to the
Customs authorities, and every soul that left the ship was gone
over with a toothcomb!”

“And the bonds, I gather, made a bulky package?”

“Certainly they did. They could hardly have been hidden on board—and
anyway we know they weren’t because they were offered for sale
within half an hour of the _Olympia’s_ arrival, long before I got
the cables going and the numbers sent out. One broker swears he
bought some of them even before the _Olympia_ got in. But you can’t
send bonds by wireless.”

“Not by wireless, but did any tug come alongside?”

“Only the official ones, and that was after the alarm was given
when every one was on the look-out. I was watching out myself for
their being passed over to some one that way. My God, Monsieur
Poirot, this thing will drive me mad! People are beginning to say
I stole them myself.”

“But you also were searched on landing, weren’t you?” asked Poirot
gently.

“Yes.”

The young man stared at him in a puzzled manner.

“You do not catch my meaning, I see,” said Poirot, smiling
enigmatically. “Now I should like to make a few inquiries at the
Bank.”

Ridgeway produced a card and scribbled a few words on it.

“Send this in and my uncle will see you at once.”

Poirot thanked him, bade farewell to Miss Farquhar, and together
we started out for Threadneedle Street and the head office of the
London and Scottish Bank. On production of Ridgeway’s card, we were
led through the labyrinth of counters and desks, skirting paying-in
clerks and paying-out clerks and up to a small office on the first
floor where the joint general managers received us. They were two
grave gentlemen, who had grown grey in the service of the Bank.
Mr. Vavasour had a short white beard, Mr. Shaw was clean shaven.

“I understand you are strictly a private inquiry agent?” said Mr.
Vavasour. “Quite so, quite so. We have, of course, placed ourselves
in the hands of Scotland Yard. Inspector McNeil has charge of the
case. A very able officer, I believe.”

“I am sure of it,” said Poirot politely. “You will permit a few
questions, on your nephew’s behalf? About this lock, who ordered
it from Hubbs’s?”

“I ordered it myself,” said Mr. Shaw. “I would not trust to any
clerk in the matter. As to the keys, Mr. Ridgeway had one, and the
other two are held by my colleague and myself.”

“And no clerk has had access to them?”

Mr. Shaw turned inquiringly to Mr. Vavasour. “I think I am correct
in saying that they have remained in the safe where we placed them
on the 23rd,” said Mr. Vavasour. “My colleague was unfortunately
taken ill a fortnight ago—in fact on the very day that Philip left
us. He has only just recovered.”

“Severe bronchitis is no joke to a man of my age,” said Mr. Shaw
ruefully. “But I am afraid Mr. Vavasour has suffered from the hard
work entailed by my absence, especially with this unexpected worry
coming on top of everything.”

Poirot asked a few more questions. I judged that he was endeavouring
to gauge the exact amount of intimacy between uncle and nephew.
Mr. Vavasour’s answers were brief and punctilious. His nephew was
a trusted official of the Bank, and had no debts or money
difficulties that he knew of. He had been entrusted with similar
missions in the past. Finally we were politely bowed out.

“I am disappointed,” said Poirot, as we emerged into the street.

“You hoped to discover more? They are such stodgy old men.”

“It is not their stodginess which disappoints me, _mon ami_. I do
not expect to find in a Bank manager a ‘keen financier with an
eagle glance’ as your favourite works of fiction put it. No, I am
disappointed in the case—it is too easy!”

“Easy?”

“Yes, do you not find it almost childishly simple?”

“You know who stole the bonds?”

“I do.”

“But then—we must—why——”

“Do not confuse and fluster yourself, Hastings. We are not going
to do anything at present.”

“But why? What are you waiting for?”

“For the _Olympia_. She is due on her return trip from New York on
Tuesday.”

“But if you know who stole the bonds, why wait? He may escape.”

“To a South Sea island where there is no extradition? No, _mon
ami_, he would find life very uncongenial there. As to why I
wait—_eh bien_ to the intelligence of Hercule Poirot the case is
perfectly clear, but for the benefit of others, not so greatly
gifted by the good God—the Inspector McNeil, for instance—it would
be as well to make a few inquiries to establish the facts. One must
have consideration for those less gifted than oneself.”

“Good Lord, Poirot! Do you know, I’d give a considerable sum of
money to see you make a thorough ass of yourself—just for once.
You’re so confoundedly conceited!”

“Do not enrage yourself, Hastings. In verity, I observe that there
are times when you almost detest me! Alas, I suffer the penalties
of greatness!”

The little man puffed out his chest, and sighed so comically that
I was forced to laugh.

Tuesday saw us speeding to Liverpool in a first-class carriage of
the L. & N.W.R. Poirot had obstinately refused to enlighten me as
to his suspicions—or certainties. He contented himself with
expressing surprise that I, too, was not equally _au fait_ with
the situation. I disdained to argue, and entrenched my curiosity
behind a rampart of pretended indifference.

Once arrived at the quay alongside which lay the big transatlantic
liner, Poirot became brisk and alert. Our proceedings consisted in
interviewing four successive stewards and inquiring after a friend
of Poirot’s who had crossed to New York on the 23rd.

“An elderly gentleman, wearing glasses. A great invalid, hardly
moved out of his cabin.”

The description appeared to tally with one Mr. Ventnor who had
occupied the cabin C 24 which was next to that of Philip Ridgeway.
Although unable to see how Poirot had deduced Mr. Ventnor’s
existence and personal appearance, I was keenly excited.

“Tell me,” I cried, “was this gentleman one of the first to land
when you got to New York?” The steward shook his head.

“No, indeed, sir, he was one of the last off the boat.”

I retired crestfallen, and observed Poirot grinning at me. He
thanked the steward, a note changed hands, and we took our
departure.

“It’s all very well,” I remarked heatedly, “but that last answer
must have damped your precious theory, grin as you please!”

“As usual, you see nothing, Hastings. That last answer is, on the
contrary, the coping-stone of my theory.”

I flung up my hands in despair.

“I give it up.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


When we were in the train, speeding towards London, Poirot wrote
busily for a few minutes, sealing up the result in an envelope.

“This is for the good Inspector McNeil. We will leave it at Scotland
Yard in passing, and then to the Rendezvous Restaurant, where I
have asked Miss Esmée Farquhar to do us the honour of dining with
us.”

“What about Ridgeway?”

“What about him?” asked Poirot with a twinkle.

“Why, you surely don’t think—you can’t——”

“The habit of incoherence is growing upon you, Hastings. As a
matter of fact I _did_ think. If Ridgeway had been the thief—which
was perfectly possible—the case would have been charming; a piece
of neat methodical work.”

“But not so charming for Miss Farquhar.”

“Possibly you are right. Therefore all is for the best. Now,
Hastings, let us review the case. I can see that you are dying to
do so. The sealed package is removed from the trunk and vanishes,
as Miss Farquhar puts it, into thin air. We will dismiss the thin
air theory, which is not practicable at the present stage of
science, and consider what is likely to have become of it. Every
one asserts the incredibility of its being smuggled ashore——”

“Yes, but we know——”

“_You_ may know, Hastings. I do not. I take the view that, since
it seemed incredible, it _was_ incredible. Two possibilities
remain: it was hidden on board—also rather difficult—or it was
thrown overboard.”

“With a cork on it, do you mean?”

“Without a cork.”

I stared.

“But if the bonds were thrown overboard, they couldn’t have been
sold in New York.”

“I admire your logical mind, Hastings. The bonds were sold in New
York, therefore they were not thrown overboard. You see where that
leads us?”

“Where we were when we started.”

“_Jamais de la vie!_ If the package was thrown overboard, and the
bonds were sold in New York, the package could not have contained
the bonds. Is there any evidence that the package _did_ contain
the bonds? Remember, Mr. Ridgeway never opened it from the time it
was placed in his hands in London.”

“Yes, but then——”

Poirot waved an impatient hand.

“Permit me to continue. The last moment that the bonds are seen as
bonds is in the office of the London and Scottish Bank on the
morning of the 23rd. They reappear in New York half an hour after
the _Olympia_ gets in, and according to one man, whom nobody
listens to, actually _before_ she gets in. Supposing then, that
they have never been on the _Olympia_ at all? Is there any other
way they could get to New York? Yes. The _Gigantic_ leaves
Southampton on the same day as the _Olympia_, and she holds the
record for the Atlantic. Mailed by the _Gigantic_, the bonds would
be in New York the day before the _Olympia_ arrived. All is clear,
the case begins to explain itself. The sealed packet is only a
dummy, and the moment of its substitution must be in the office in
the Bank. It would be an easy matter for any of the three men
present to have prepared a duplicate package which could be
substituted for the genuine one. _Très bien_, the bonds are mailed
to a confederate in New York, with instructions to sell as soon as
the _Olympia_ is in, but some one must travel on the _Olympia_ to
engineer the supposed moment of the robbery.”

“But why?”

“Because if Ridgeway merely opens the packet and finds it a dummy,
suspicion flies at once to London. No, the man on board in the
cabin next door does his work, pretends to force the lock in an
obvious manner so as to draw immediate attention to the theft,
really unlocks the trunk with a duplicate key, throws the package
overboard and waits until the last to leave the boat. Naturally he
wears glasses to conceal his eyes, and is an invalid since he does
not want to run the risk of meeting Ridgeway. He steps ashore in
New York and returns by the first boat available.”

“But who—which was he?”

“The man who had a duplicate key, the man who ordered the lock,
the man who has _not_ been severely ill with bronchitis at his home
in the country—_enfin_, that ‘stodgy’ old man, Mr. Shaw! There are
criminals in high places sometimes, my friend. Ah, here we are.
Mademoiselle, I have succeeded! You permit?”

And, beaming, Poirot kissed the astonished girl lightly on either
cheek!




  VI


  The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb


I have always considered that one of the most thrilling and dramatic
of the many adventures I have shared with Poirot was that of our
investigation into the strange series of deaths which followed upon
the discovery and opening of the Tomb of King Men-her-Ra.

Hard upon the discovery of the Tomb of Tut-ankh-Amen by Lord
Carnarvon, Sir John Willard and Mr. Bleibner of New York, pursuing
their excavations not far from Cairo, in the vicinity of the
Pyramids of Gizeh, came unexpectedly on a series of funeral
chambers. The greatest interest was aroused by their discovery.
The Tomb appeared to be that of King Men-her-Ra, one of those
shadowy kings of the Eighth Dynasty, when the Old Kingdom was
falling to decay. Little was known about this period, and the
discoveries were fully reported in the newspapers.

An event soon occurred which took a profound hold on the public
mind. Sir John Willard died quite suddenly of heart failure.

The more sensational newspapers immediately took the opportunity
of reviving all the old superstitious stories connected with the
ill luck of certain Egyptian treasures. The unlucky Mummy at the
British Museum, that hoary old chestnut, was dragged out with fresh
zest, was quietly denied by the Museum, but nevertheless enjoyed
all its usual vogue.

A fortnight later Mr. Bleibner died of acute blood poisoning, and
a few days afterwards a nephew of his shot himself in New York.
The “Curse of Men-her-Ra” was the talk of the day, and the magic
power of dead and gone Egypt was exalted to a fetish point.

It was then that Poirot received a brief note from Lady Willard,
widow of the dead archaeologist, asking him to go and see her at
her house in Kensington Square. I accompanied him.

Lady Willard was a tall, thin woman, dressed in deep mourning. Her
haggard face bore eloquent testimony to her recent grief.

“It is kind of you to have come so promptly, Monsieur Poirot.”

“I am at your service, Lady Willard. You wished to consult me?”

“You are, I am aware, a detective, but it is not only as a detective
that I wish to consult you. You are a man of original views, I
know, you have imagination, experience of the world, tell me,
Monsieur Poirot, what are your views on the supernatural?”

Poirot hesitated for a moment before he replied. He seemed to be
considering. Finally he said:

“Let us not misunderstand each other, Lady Willard. It is not a
general question that you are asking me there. It has a personal
application, has it not? You are referring obliquely to the death
of your late husband?”

“That is so,” she admitted.

“You want me to investigate the circumstances of his death?”

“I want you to ascertain for me exactly how much is newspaper
chatter, and how much may be said to be founded on fact? Three
deaths, Monsieur Poirot—each one explicable taken by itself, but
taken together surely an almost unbelievable coincidence, and all
within a month of the opening of the tomb! It may be mere
superstition, it may be some potent curse from the past that
operates in ways undreamed of by modern science. The fact
remains—three deaths! And I am afraid, Monsieur Poirot, horribly
afraid. It may not yet be the end.”

“For whom do you fear?”

“For my son. When the news of my husband’s death came I was ill.
My son, who has just come down from Oxford, went out there. He
brought the—the body home, but now he has gone out again, in spite
of my prayers and entreaties. He is so fascinated by the work that
he intends to take his father’s place and carry on the system of
excavations. You may think me a foolish, credulous woman, but,
Monsieur Poirot, I am afraid. Supposing that the spirit of the dead
King is not yet appeased? Perhaps to you I seem to be talking
nonsense——”

“No, indeed, Lady Willard,” said Poirot quickly. “I, too, believe
in the force of superstition, one of the greatest forces the world
has ever known.”

I looked at him in surprise. I should never have credited Poirot
with being superstitious. But the little man was obviously in
earnest.

“What you really demand is that I shall protect your son? I will
do my utmost to keep him from harm.”

“Yes, in the ordinary way, but against an occult influence?”

“In volumes of the Middle Ages, Lady Willard, you will find many
ways of counteracting black magic. Perhaps they knew more than we
moderns with all our boasted science. Now let us come to facts,
that I may have guidance. Your husband had always been a devoted
Egyptologist, hadn’t he?”

“Yes, from his youth upwards. He was one of the greatest living
authorities upon the subject.”

“But Mr. Bleibner, I understand, was more or less of an amateur?”

“Oh, quite. He was a very wealthy man who dabbled freely in any
subject that happened to take his fancy. My husband managed to
interest him in Egyptology, and it was his money that was so useful
in financing the expedition.”

“And the nephew? What do you know of his tastes? Was he with the
party at all?”

“I do not think so. In fact I never knew of his existence till I
read of his death in the paper, I do not think he and Mr. Bleibner
can have been at all intimate. He never spoke of having any
relations.”

“Who are the other members of the party?”

“Well, there is Dr. Tosswill, a minor official connected with the
British Museum; Mr. Schneider of the Metropolitan Museum in New
York; a young American secretary; Dr. Ames, who accompanies the
expedition in his professional capacity; and Hassan, my husband’s
devoted native servant.”

“Do you remember the name of the American secretary?”

“Harper, I think, but I cannot be sure. He had not been with Mr.
Bleibner very long, I know. He was a very pleasant young fellow.”

“Thank you, Lady Willard.”

“If there is anything else——?”

“For the moment, nothing. Leave it now in my hands, and be assured
that I will do all that is humanly possible to protect your son.”

They were not exactly reassuring words, and I observed Lady Willard
wince as he uttered them. Yet, at the same time, the fact that he
had not pooh-poohed her fears seemed in itself to be a relief to
her.

For my part I had never before suspected that Poirot had so deep
a vein of superstition in his nature. I tackled him on the subject
as we went homewards. His manner was grave and earnest.

“But yes, Hastings. I believe in these things. You must not
underrate the force of superstition.”

“What are we going to do about it?”

“_Toujours pratique_, the good Hastings! _Eh bien_, to begin with
we are going to cable to New York for fuller details of young Mr.
Bleibner’s death.”

He duly sent off his cable. The reply was full and precise. Young
Rupert Bleibner had been in low water for several years. He had
been a beach-comber and a remittance man in several South Sea
islands, but had returned to New York two years ago, where he had
rapidly sunk lower and lower. The most significant thing, to my
mind, was that he had recently managed to borrow enough money to
take him to Egypt. “I’ve a good friend there I can borrow from,”
he had declared. Here, however, his plans had gone awry. He had
returned to New York cursing his skinflint of an uncle who cared
more for the bones of dead and gone kings than his own flesh and
blood. It was during his sojourn in Egypt that the death of Sir
John Willard occurred. Rupert had plunged once more into his life
of dissipation in New York, and then, without warning, he had
committed suicide, leaving behind him a letter which contained some
curious phrases. It seemed written in a sudden fit of remorse. He
referred to himself as a leper and an outcast, and the letter ended
by declaring that such as he were better dead.

A shadowy theory leapt into my brain. I had never really believed
in the vengeance of a long dead Egyptian king. I saw here a more
modern crime. Supposing this young man had decided to do away with
his uncle—preferably by poison. By mistake, Sir John Willard
receives the fatal dose. The young man returns to New York, haunted
by his crime. The news of his uncle’s death reaches him. He realizes
how unnecessary his crime has been, and stricken with remorse takes
his own life.

I outlined my solution to Poirot. He was interested.

“It is ingenious what you have thought of there—decidedly it is
ingenious. It may even be true. But you leave out of count the
fatal influence of the Tomb.”

I shrugged my shoulders.

“You still think that has something to do with it?”

“So much so, _mon ami_, that we start for Egypt to-morrow.”

“What?” I cried, astonished.

“I have said it.” An expression of conscious heroism spread over
Poirot’s face. Then he groaned. “But, oh,” he lamented, “the sea!
The hateful sea!”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


It was a week later. Beneath our feet was the golden sand of the
desert. The hot sun poured down overhead. Poirot, the picture of
misery, wilted by my side. The little man was not a good traveller.
Our four days’ voyage from Marseilles had been one long agony to
him. He had landed at Alexandria the wraith of his former self,
even his usual neatness had deserted him. We had arrived in Cairo
and had driven out at once to the Mena House Hotel, right in the
shadow of the Pyramids.

The charm of Egypt had laid hold of me. Not so Poirot. Dressed
precisely the same as in London, he carried a small clothes-brush
in his pocket and waged an unceasing war on the dust which
accumulated on his dark apparel.

“And my boots,” he wailed. “Regard them, Hastings. My boots, of
the neat patent leather, usually so smart and shining. See, the
sand is inside them, which is painful, and outside them, which
outrages the eyesight. Also the heat, it causes my moustaches to
become limp—but limp!”

“Look at the Sphinx,” I urged. “Even I can feel the mystery and
the charm it exhales.”

Poirot looked at it discontentedly.

“It has not the air happy,” he declared. “How could it, half-buried
in sand in that untidy fashion. Ah, this cursed sand!”

“Come, now, there’s a lot of sand in Belgium,” I reminded him,
mindful of a holiday spent at Knocke-sur-mer in the midst of “_les
dunes impeccables_” as the guide-book had phrased it.

“Not in Brussels,” declared Poirot. He gazed at the Pyramids
thoughtfully. “It is true that they, at least, are of a shape solid
and geometrical, but their surface is of an unevenness most
unpleasing. And the palm-trees I like them not. Not even do they
plant them in rows!”

I cut short his lamentations, by suggesting that we should start
for the camp. We were to ride there on camels, and the beasts were
patiently kneeling, waiting for us to mount, in charge of several
picturesque boys headed by a voluble dragoman.

I pass over the spectacle of Poirot on a camel. He started by
groans and lamentations and ended by shrieks, gesticulations and
invocations to the Virgin Mary and every Saint in the calendar. In
the end, he descended ignominiously and finished the journey on a
diminutive donkey. I must admit that a trotting camel is no joke
for the amateur. I was stiff for several days.

At last we neared the scene of the excavations. A sunburnt man with
a grey beard, in white clothes and wearing a helmet, came to meet
us.

“Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings? We received your cable. I’m
sorry that there was no one to meet you in Cairo. An unforeseen
event occurred which completely disorganized our plans.”

Poirot paled. His hand, which had stolen to his clothes-brush,
stayed its course.

“Not another death?” he breathed.

“Yes.”

“Sir Guy Willard?” I cried.

“No, Captain Hastings. My American colleague, Mr. Schneider.”

“And the cause?” demanded Poirot.

“Tetanus.”

I blanched. All around me I seemed to feel an atmosphere of evil,
subtle and menacing. A horrible thought flashed across me. Supposing
I were the next?

“_Mon Dieu_,” said Poirot, in a very low voice, “I do not understand
this. It is horrible. Tell me, monsieur, there is no doubt that it
was tetanus?”

“I believe not. But Dr. Ames will tell you more than I can do.”

“Ah, of course, you are not the doctor.”

“My name is Tosswill.”

This, then, was the British expert described by Lady Willard as
being a minor official at the British Museum. There was something
at once grave and steadfast about him that took my fancy.

“If you will come with me,” continued Dr. Tosswill, “I will take
you to Sir Guy Willard. He was most anxious to be informed as soon
as you should arrive.”

We were taken across the camp to a large tent. Dr. Tosswill lifted
up the flap and we entered. Three men were sitting inside.

“Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings have arrived, Sir Guy,” said
Tosswill.

The youngest of the three men jumped up and came forward to greet
us. There was a certain impulsiveness in his manner which reminded
me of his mother. He was not nearly so sunburnt as the others, and
that fact, coupled with a certain haggardness round the eyes, made
him look older than his twenty-two years. He was clearly endeavouring
to bear up under a severe mental strain.

He introduced his two companions, Dr. Ames, a capable looking man
of thirty odd, with a touch of greying hair at the temples, and
Mr. Harper, the secretary, a pleasant lean young man wearing the
national insignia of horn-rimmed spectacles.

After a few minutes’ desultory conversation the latter went out,
and Dr. Tosswill followed him. We were left alone with Sir Guy and
Dr. Ames.

“Please ask any questions you want to ask, Monsieur Poirot,” said
Willard. “We are utterly dumbfounded at this strange series of
disasters, but it isn’t—it can’t be, anything but coincidence.”

There was a nervousness about his manner which rather belied the
words. I saw that Poirot was studying him keenly.

“Your heart is really in this work, Sir Guy?”

“Rather. No matter what happens, or what comes of it, the work is
going on. Make up your mind to that.”

Poirot wheeled round on the other.

“What have you to say to that, _monsieur le docteur_?”

“Well,” drawled the doctor, “I’m not for quitting myself.”

Poirot made one of those expressive grimaces of his.

“Then, _évidemment_, we must find out just how we stand. When did
Mr. Schneider’s death take place?”

“Three days ago.”

“You are sure it was tetanus?”

“Dead sure.”

“It couldn’t have been a case of strychnine poisoning, for
instance?”

“No, Monsieur Poirot. I see what you’re getting at. But it was a
clear case of tetanus.”

“Did you not inject anti-serum?”

“Certainly we did,” said the doctor dryly. “Every conceivable thing
that could be done was tried.”

“Had you the anti-serum with you?”

“No. We procured it from Cairo.”

“Have there been any other cases of tetanus in the camp?”

“No, not one.”

“Are you certain that the death of Mr. Bleibner was not due to
tetanus?”

“Absolutely plumb certain. He had a scratch upon his thumb which
became poisoned, and septicæmia set in. It sounds pretty much the
same to a layman, I dare say, but the two things are entirely
different.”

“Then we have four deaths—all totally dissimilar, one heart failure,
one blood poisoning, one suicide and one tetanus.”

“Exactly, Monsieur Poirot.”

“Are you certain that there is nothing which might link the four
together?”

“I don’t quite understand you?”

“I will put it plainly. Was any act committed by those four men
which might seem to denote disrespect to the spirit of Men-her-Ra?”

The doctor gazed at Poirot in astonishment.

“You’re talking through your hat, Monsieur Poirot. Surely you’ve
not been guyed into believing all that fool talk?”

“Absolute nonsense,” muttered Willard angrily.

Poirot remained placidly immovable, blinking a little out of his
green cat’s eyes.

“So you do not believe it, _monsieur le docteur_?”

“No, sir, I do not,” declared the doctor emphatically. “I am a
scientific man, and I believe only what science teaches.”

“Was there no science then in Ancient Egypt?” asked Poirot softly.
He did not wait for a reply, and indeed Dr. Ames seemed rather at
a loss for the moment. “No, no, do not answer me, but tell me this.
What do the native workmen think?”

“I guess,” said Dr. Ames, “that, where white folk lose their heads,
natives aren’t going to be far behind. I’ll admit that they’re
getting what you might call scared—but they’ve no cause to be.”

“I wonder,” said Poirot non-committally.

Sir Guy leant forward.

“Surely,” he cried incredulously, “you cannot believe in—oh, but
the thing’s absurd! You can know nothing of Ancient Egypt if you
think that.”

For answer Poirot produced a little book from his pocket—an ancient
tattered volume. As he held it out I saw its title, _The Magic of
the Egyptians and Chaldeans_. Then, wheeling round, he strode out
of the tent. The doctor stared at me.

“What is his little idea?”

The phrase, so familiar on Poirot’s lips, made me smile as it came
from another.

“I don’t know exactly,” I confessed. “He’s got some plan of
exorcizing the evil spirits, I believe.”

I went in search of Poirot, and found him talking to the lean-faced
young man who had been the late Mr. Bleibner’s secretary.

“No,” Mr. Harper was saying, “I’ve only been six months with the
expedition. Yes, I knew Mr. Bleibner’s affairs pretty well.”

“Can you recount to me anything concerning his nephew?”

“He turned up here one day, not a bad-looking fellow. I’d never
met him before, but some of the others had—Ames, I think, and
Schneider. The old man wasn’t at all pleased to see him. They were
at it in no time, hammer and tongs. ‘Not a cent,’ the old man
shouted. ‘Not one cent now or when I’m dead. I intend to leave my
money to the furtherance of my life’s work. I’ve been talking it
over with Mr. Schneider to-day.’ And a bit more of the same. Young
Bleibner lit out for Cairo right away.”

“Was he in perfectly good health at the time?”

“The old man?”

“No, the young one.”

“I believe he did mention there was something wrong with him. But
it couldn’t have been anything serious, or I should have remembered.”

“One thing more, has Mr. Bleibner left a will?”

“So far as we know, he has not.”

“Are you remaining with the expedition, Mr. Harper?”

“No, sir, I am not. I’m for New York as soon as I can square up
things here. You may laugh if you like, but I’m not going to be
this blasted old Men-her-Ra’s next victim. He’ll get me if I stop
here.”

The young man wiped the perspiration from his brow.

Poirot turned away. Over his shoulder he said with a peculiar
smile:

“Remember, he got one of his victims in New York.”

“Oh, hell!” said Mr. Harper forcibly.

“That young man is nervous,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “He is on
the edge, but absolutely on the edge.”

I glanced at Poirot curiously, but his enigmatical smile told me
nothing. In company with Sir Guy Willard and Dr. Tosswill we were
taken round the excavations. The principal finds had been removed
to Cairo, but some of the tomb furniture was extremely interesting.
The enthusiasm of the young baronet was obvious, but I fancied that
I detected a shade of nervousness in his manner as though he could
not quite escape from the feeling of menace in the air. As we
entered the tent which had been assigned to us, for a wash before
joining the evening meal, a tall dark figure in white robes stood
aside to let us pass with a graceful gesture and a murmured greeting
in Arabic. Poirot stopped.

“You are Hassan, the late Sir John Willard’s servant?”

“I served my Lord Sir John, now I serve his son.” He took a step
nearer to us and lowered his voice. “You are a wise one, they say,
learned in dealing with evil spirits. Let the young master depart
from here. There is evil in the air around us.”

And with an abrupt gesture, not waiting for a reply, he strode
away.

“Evil in the air,” muttered Poirot. “Yes, I feel it.”

Our meal was hardly a cheerful one. The floor was left to Dr.
Tosswill, who discoursed at length upon Egyptian antiquities. Just
as we were preparing to retire to rest, Sir Guy caught Poirot by
the arm and pointed. A shadowy figure was moving amidst the tents.
It was no human one: I recognized distinctly the dog-headed figure
I had seen carved on the walls of the tomb.

My blood literally froze at the sight.

“_Mon Dieu!_” murmured Poirot, crossing himself vigorously. “Anubis,
the jackal-headed, the god of departing souls.”

“Some one is hoaxing us,” cried Dr. Tosswill, rising indignantly
to his feet.

“It went into your tent, Harper,” muttered Sir Guy, his face
dreadfully pale.

“No,” said Poirot, shaking his head, “into that of the Dr. Ames.”

The doctor stared at him incredulously; then, repeating Dr.
Tosswill’s words, he cried:

“Some one is hoaxing us. Come, we’ll soon catch the fellow.”

He dashed energetically in pursuit of the shadowy apparition. I
followed him, but, search as we would, we could find no trace of
any living soul having passed that way. We returned, somewhat
disturbed in mind, to find Poirot taking energetic measures, in
his own way, to ensure his personal safety. He was busily
surrounding our tent with various diagrams and inscriptions which
he was drawing in the sand. I recognized the five-pointed star or
Pentagon many times repeated. As was his wont, Poirot was at the
same time delivering an impromptu lecture on witchcraft and magic
in general, White Magic as opposed to Black, with various references
to the Ka and the Book of the Dead thrown in.

It appeared to excite the liveliest contempt in Dr. Tosswill, who
drew me aside, literally snorting with rage.

“Balderdash, sir,” he exclaimed angrily. “Pure balderdash. The
man’s an impostor. He doesn’t know the difference between the
superstitions of the Middle Ages and the beliefs of Ancient Egypt.
Never have I heard such a hotch-potch of ignorance and credulity.”

I calmed the excited expert, and joined Poirot in the tent. My
little friend was beaming cheerfully.

“We can now sleep in peace,” he declared happily. “And I can do
with some sleep. My head, it aches abominably. Ah, for a good
_tisane_!”

As though in answer to prayer, the flap of the tent was lifted and
Hassan appeared, bearing a steaming cup which he offered to Poirot.
It proved to be camomile tea, a beverage of which he is inordinately
fond. Having thanked Hassan and refused his offer of another cup
for myself, we were left alone once more. I stood at the door of
the tent some time after undressing, looking out over the desert.

“A wonderful place,” I said aloud, “and a wonderful work. I can
feel the fascination. This desert life, this probing into the heart
of a vanished civilization. Surely, Poirot, you, too, must feel
the charm?”

I got no answer, and I turned, a little annoyed. My annoyance was
quickly changed to concern. Poirot was lying back across the rude
couch, his face horribly convulsed. Beside him was the empty cup.
I rushed to his side, then dashed out and across the camp to Dr.
Ames’s tent.

“Dr. Ames!” I cried. “Come at once.”

“What’s the matter?” said the doctor, appearing in pyjamas.

“My friend. He’s ill. Dying. The camomile tea. Don’t let Hassan
leave the camp.”

Like a flash the doctor ran to our tent. Poirot was lying as I left
him.

“Extraordinary,” cried Ames. “Looks like a seizure—or—what did you
say about something he drank?” He picked up the empty cup.

“Only I did not drink it!” said a placid voice.

We turned in amazement. Poirot was sitting up on the bed. He was
smiling.

“No,” he said gently. “I did not drink it. While my good friend
Hastings was apostrophizing the night, I took the opportunity of
pouring it, not down my throat, but into a little bottle. That
little bottle will go to the analytical chemist. No”—as the doctor
made a sudden movement—“as a sensible man, you will understand that
violence will be of no avail. During Hastings’ brief absence to
fetch you, I have had time to put the bottle in safe keeping. Ah,
quick, Hastings, hold him!”

I misunderstood Poirot’s anxiety. Eager to save my friend, I flung
myself in front of him. But the doctor’s swift movement had another
meaning. His hand went to his mouth, a smell of bitter almonds
filled the air, and he swayed forward and fell.

“Another victim,” said Poirot gravely, “but the last. Perhaps it
is the best way. He has three deaths on his head.”

“Dr. Ames?” I cried, stupefied. “But I thought you believed in some
occult influence?”

“You misunderstood me, Hastings. What I meant was that I believe
in the terrific force of superstition. Once get it firmly
established that a series of deaths are supernatural, and you might
almost stab a man in broad daylight, and it would still be put down
to the curse, so strongly is the instinct of the supernatural
implanted in the human race. I suspected from the first that a man
was taking advantage of that instinct. The idea came to him, I
imagine, with the death of Sir John Willard. A fury of superstition
arose at once. As far as I could see, nobody could derive any
particular profit from Sir John’s death. Mr. Bleibner was a
different case. He was a man of great wealth. The information I
received from New York contained several suggestive points. To
begin with, young Bleibner was reported to have said he had a good
friend in Egypt from whom he could borrow. It was tacitly understood
that he meant his uncle, but it seemed to me that in that case he
would have said so outright. The words suggest some boon companion
of his own. Another thing, he scraped up enough money to take him
to Egypt, his uncle refused outright to advance him a penny, yet
he was able to pay the return passage to New York. Some one must
have lent him the money.”

“All that was very thin,” I objected.

“But there was more. Hastings, there occur often enough words
spoken metaphorically which are taken literally. The opposite can
happen too. In this case, words which were meant literally were
taken metaphorically. Young Bleibner wrote plainly enough: ‘I am
a leper,’ but nobody realized that he shot himself because he
believed that he had contracted the dread disease of leprosy.”

“What?” I ejaculated.

“It was the clever invention of a diabolical mind. Young Bleibner
was suffering from some minor skin trouble, he had lived in the
South Sea Islands, where the disease is common enough. Ames was a
former friend of his, and a well-known medical man, he would never
dream of doubting his word. When I arrived here, my suspicions were
divided between Harper and Dr. Ames, but I soon realized that only
the doctor could have perpetrated and concealed the crimes, and I
learnt from Harper that he was previously acquainted with young
Bleibner. Doubtless the latter at some time or another had made a
will or had insured his life in favour of the doctor. The latter
saw his chance of acquiring wealth. It was easy for him to inoculate
Mr. Bleibner with the deadly germs. Then the nephew, overcome with
despair at the dread news his friend had conveyed to him, shot
himself. Mr. Bleibner, whatever his intentions, had made no will.
His fortune would pass to his nephew and from him to the doctor.”

“And Mr. Schneider?”

“We cannot be sure. He knew young Bleibner too, remember, and may
have suspected something, or, again, the doctor may have thought
that a further death motiveless and purposeless would strengthen
the coils of superstition. Furthermore, I will tell you an
interesting psychological fact, Hastings. A murderer has always a
strong desire to repeat his successful crime, the performance of
it grows upon him. Hence my fears for young Willard. The figure of
Anubis you saw to-night was Hassan, dressed up by my orders. I
wanted to see if I could frighten the doctor. But it would take
more than the supernatural to frighten him. I could see that he
was not entirely taken in by my pretences of belief in the occult.
The little comedy I played for him did not deceive him. I suspected
that he would endeavour to make me the next victim. Ah, but in
spite of _la mer maudite_, the heat abominable, and the annoyances
of the sand, the little grey cells still functioned!”

Poirot proved to be perfectly right in his premises. Young Bleibner,
some years ago, in a fit of drunken merriment, had made a jocular
will, leaving “my cigarette case you admire so much and everything
else of which I die possessed which will be principally debts to
my good friend Robert Ames who once saved my life from drowning.”

The case was hushed up as far as possible, and, to this day, people
talk of the remarkable series of deaths in connection with the Tomb
of Men-her-Ra as a triumphal proof of the vengeance of a bygone
king upon the desecrators of his tomb—a belief which, as Poirot
pointed out to me, is contrary to all Egyptian belief and thought.




  VII

  The Jewel Robbery at the _Grand Metropolitan_

“Poirot,” I said, “a change of air would do you good.”

“You think so, _mon ami_?”

“I am sure of it.”

“Eh—eh?” said my friend, smiling. “It is all arranged, then?”

“You will come?”

“Where do you propose to take me?”

“Brighton. As a matter of fact, a friend of mine in the City put
me on to a very good thing, and—well, I have money to burn, as the
saying goes. I think a week-end at the _Grand Metropolitan_ would
do us all the good in the world.”

“Thank you, I accept most gratefully. You have the good heart to
think of an old man. And the good heart, it is in the end worth
all the little grey cells. Yes, yes, I who speak to you am in
danger of forgetting that sometimes.”

I did not quite relish the implication. I fancy that Poirot is
sometimes a little inclined to underestimate my mental capacities.
But his pleasure was so evident that I put my slight annoyance
aside.

“Then, that’s all right,” I said hastily.

Saturday evening saw us dining at the _Grand Metropolitan_ in the
midst of a gay throng. All the world and his wife seemed to be at
Brighton. The dresses were marvellous, and the jewels—worn sometimes
with more love of display than good taste—were something magnificent.

“_Hein_, it is a sight this!” murmured Poirot. “This is the home
of the Profiteer, is it not so, Hastings?”

“Supposed to be,” I replied. “But we’ll hope they aren’t all tarred
with the Profiteering brush.”

Poirot gazed round him placidly.

“The sight of so many jewels makes me wish I had turned my brains
to crime, instead of to its detection. What a magnificent
opportunity for some thief of distinction! Regard, Hastings, that
stout woman by the pillar. She is, as you would say, plastered with
gems.”

I followed his eyes.

“Why,” I exclaimed, “it’s Mrs. Opalsen.”

“You know her?”

“Slightly. Her husband is a rich stockbroker who made a fortune in
the recent Oil boom.”

After dinner we ran across the Opalsens in the lounge, and I
introduced Poirot to them. We chatted for a few minutes, and ended
by having our coffee together.

Poirot said a few words in praise of some of the costlier gems
displayed on the lady’s ample bosom, and she brightened up at once.

“It’s a perfect hobby of mine, Mr. Poirot. I just _love_ jewellery.
Ed knows my weakness, and every time things go well he brings me
something new. You are interested in precious stones?”

“I have had a good deal to do with them one time and another,
madame. My profession has brought me into contact with some of the
most famous jewels in the world.”

He went on to narrate, with discreet pseudonyms, the story of the
historic jewels of a reigning house, and Mrs. Opalsen listened with
bated breath.

“There now!” she exclaimed, as he ended. “If it isn’t just like a
play! You know, I’ve got some pearls of my own that have a history
attached to them. I believe it’s supposed to be one of the finest
necklaces in the world—the pearls are so beautifully matched and
so perfect in colour. I declare I really must run up and get it!”

“Oh, madame,” protested Poirot, “you are too amiable. Pray do not
derange yourself!”

“Oh, but I’d like to show it to you.”

The buxom dame waddled across to the lift briskly enough. Her
husband, who had been talking to me, looked at Poirot inquiringly.

“Madame your wife is so amiable as to insist on showing me her
pearl necklace,” explained the latter.

“Oh, the pearls!” Opalsen smiled in a satisfied fashion. “Well,
they _are_ worth seeing. Cost a pretty penny too! Still, the
money’s there all right; I could get what I paid for them any
day—perhaps more. May have to, too, if things go on as they are
now. Money’s confoundedly tight in the City. All this infernal
E.P.D.” He rambled on, launching into technicalities where I could
not follow him.

He was interrupted by a small page-boy who approached and murmured
something in his ear.

“Eh—what? I’ll come at once. Not taken ill, is she? Excuse me,
gentlemen.”

He left us abruptly. Poirot leaned back and lit one of his tiny
Russian cigarettes. Then, carefully and meticulously, he arranged
the empty coffee-cups in a neat row, and beamed happily on the
result.

The minutes passed. The Opalsens did not return.

“Curious,” I remarked, at length. “I wonder when they will come
back.”

Poirot watched the ascending spirals of smoke, and then said
thoughtfully:

“They will not come back.”

“Why?”

“Because, my friend, something has happened.”

“What sort of thing? How do you know?” I asked curiously.

Poirot smiled.

“A few moments ago the manager came hurriedly out of his office
and ran upstairs. He was much agitated. The lift-boy is deep in
talk with one of the pages. The lift-bell has rung three times,
but he heeds it not. Thirdly, even the waiters are _distrait_; and
to make a waiter _distrait_——” Poirot shook his head with an air
of finality. “The affair must indeed be of the first magnitude.
Ah, it is as I thought! Here come the police.”

Two men had just entered the hotel—one in uniform, the other in
plain clothes. They spoke to a page, and were immediately ushered
upstairs. A few minutes later, the same boy descended and came up
to where we were sitting.

“Mr. Opalsen’s compliments, and would you step upstairs.”

Poirot sprang nimbly to his feet. One would have said that he
awaited the summons. I followed with no less alacrity.

The Opalsens’ apartments were situated on the first floor. After
knocking on the door, the page-boy retired, and we answered the
summons, “Come in!” A strange scene met our eyes. The room was Mrs.
Opalsen’s bedroom, and in the centre of it, lying back in an
arm-chair, was the lady herself, weeping violently. She presented
an extraordinary spectacle, with the tears making great furrows in
the powder with which her complexion was liberally coated. Mr.
Opalsen was striding up and down angrily. The two police officials
stood in the middle of the room, one with a notebook in hand. An
hotel chambermaid, looking frightened to death, stood by the
fire-place; and on the other side of the room a Frenchwoman,
obviously Mrs. Opalsen’s maid, was weeping and wringing her hands,
with an intensity of grief that rivalled that of her mistress.

Into this pandemonium stepped Poirot, neat and smiling. Immediately,
with an energy surprising in one of her bulk, Mrs. Opalsen sprang
from her chair towards him.

“There now; Ed may say what he likes, but I believe in luck, I do.
It was fated I should meet you the way I did this evening, and I’ve
a feeling that if you can’t get my pearls back for me nobody can.”

“Calm yourself, I pray of you, madame.” Poirot patted her hand
soothingly. “Reassure yourself. All will be well. Hercule Poirot
will aid you!”

Mr. Opalsen turned to the police inspector.

“There will be no objection to my—er—calling in this gentleman, I
suppose?”

“None at all, sir,” replied the man civilly, but with complete
indifference. “Perhaps now your lady’s feeling better she’ll just
let us have the facts?”

Mrs. Opalsen looked helplessly at Poirot. He led her back to her
chair.

“Seat yourself, madame, and recount to us the whole history without
agitating yourself.”

Thus abjured, Mrs. Opalsen dried her eyes gingerly, and began.

“I came upstairs after dinner to fetch my pearls for Mr. Poirot
here to see. The chambermaid and Célestine were both in the room
as usual——”

“Excuse me, madame, but what do you mean by ‘as usual’?”

Mr. Opalsen explained.

“I make it a rule that no one is to come into this room unless
Célestine, the maid, is there also. The chambermaid does the room
in the morning while Célestine is present, and comes in after
dinner to turn down the beds under the same conditions; otherwise
she never enters the room.”

“Well, as I was saying,” continued Mrs. Opalsen, “I came up. I went
to the drawer here,”—she indicated the bottom right-hand drawer of
the knee-hole dressing-table—“took out my jewel-case and unlocked
it. It seemed quite as usual—but the pearls were not there!”

The inspector had been busy with his notebook. “When had you last
seen them?” he asked.

“They were there when I went down to dinner.”

“You are sure?”

“Quite sure. I was uncertain whether to wear them or not, but in
the end I decided on the emeralds, and put them back in the
jewel-case.”

“Who locked up the jewel-case?”

“I did. I wear the key on a chain round my neck.” She held it up
as she spoke.

The inspector examined it, and shrugged his shoulders.

“The thief must have had a duplicate key. No difficult matter. The
lock is quite a simple one. What did you do after you’d locked the
jewel-case?”

“I put it back in the bottom drawer where I always keep it.”

“You didn’t lock the drawer?”

“No, I never do. My maid remains in the room till I come up, so
there’s no need.”

The inspector’s face grew graver.

“Am I to understand that the jewels were there when you went down
to dinner, and that since then _the maid has not left the room_?”

Suddenly, as though the horror of her own situation for the first
time burst upon her, Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and,
flinging herself upon Poirot, poured out a torrent of incoherent
French.

The suggestion was infamous! That she should be suspected of
robbing Madame! The police were well known to be of a stupidity
incredible! But Monsieur, who was a Frenchman—

“A Belgian,” interjected Poirot, but Célestine paid no attention
to the correction.

Monsieur would not stand by and see her falsely accused, while that
infamous chambermaid was allowed to go scot-free. She had never
liked her—a bold, red-faced thing—a born thief. She had said from
the first that she was not honest. And had kept a sharp watch over
her too, when she was doing Madame’s room! Let those idiots of
policemen search her, and if they did not find Madame’s pearls on
her it would be very surprising!

Although this harangue was uttered in rapid and virulent French,
Célestine had interlarded it with a wealth of gesture, and the
chambermaid realized at least a part of her meaning. She reddened
angrily.

“If that foreign woman’s saying I took the pearls, it’s a lie!”
she declared heatedly. “I never so much as saw them.”

“Search her!” screamed the other. “You will find it is as I say.”

“You’re a liar—do you hear?” said the chambermaid, advancing upon
her. “Stole ’em yourself, and want to put it on me. Why, I was only
in the room about three minutes before the lady come up, and then
you were sitting here the whole time, as you always do, like a cat
watching a mouse.”

The inspector looked across inquiringly at Célestine. “Is that
true? Didn’t you leave the room at all?”

“I did not actually leave her alone,” admitted Célestine reluctantly,
“but I went into my own room through the door here twice—once to
fetch a reel of cotton, and once for my scissors. She must have
done it then.”

“You wasn’t gone a minute,” retorted the chambermaid angrily. “Just
popped out and in again. I’d be glad if the police _would_ search
me. _I’ve nothing to be afraid of_.”

At this moment there was a tap at the door. The inspector went to
it. His face brightened when he saw who it was.

“Ah!” he said. “That’s rather fortunate. I sent for one of our
female searchers, and she’s just arrived. Perhaps if you wouldn’t
mind going into the room next door.”

He looked at the chambermaid, who stepped across the threshold with
a toss of her head, the searcher following her closely.

The French girl had sunk sobbing into a chair. Poirot was looking
round the room, the main features of which I have made clear by a
sketch.

[A sketch of the bedroom, adjoining maid's room, and corridor.]

“Where does that door lead?” he inquired, nodding his head towards
the one by the window.

“Into the next apartment, I believe,” said the inspector. “It’s
bolted, anyway, on this side.”

Poirot walked across to it, tried it, then drew back the bolt and
tried it again.

“And on the other side as well,” he remarked. “Well, that seems to
rule out that.”

He walked over to the windows, examining each of them in turn.

“And again—nothing. Not even a balcony outside.”

“Even if there were,” said the inspector impatiently, “I don’t see
how that would help us, if the maid never left the room.”

“_Évidemment_,” said Poirot, not disconcerted. “As Mademoiselle is
positive she did not leave the room——”

He was interrupted by the reappearance of the chambermaid and the
police searcher.

“Nothing,” said the latter laconically.

“I should hope not, indeed,” said the chambermaid virtuously. “And
that French hussy ought to be ashamed of herself taking away an
honest girl’s character!”

“There, there, my girl; that’s all right,” said the inspector,
opening the door. “Nobody suspects you. You go along and get on
with your work.”

The chambermaid went unwillingly.

“Going to search _her_?” she demanded, pointing at Célestine.

“Yes, yes!” He shut the door on her and turned the key.

Célestine accompanied the searcher into the small room in her turn.
A few minutes later she also returned. Nothing had been found on
her.

The inspector’s face grew graver.

“I’m afraid I’ll have to ask you to come along with me all the
same, miss.” He turned to Mrs. Opalsen. “I’m sorry, madam, but all
the evidence points that way. If she’s not got them on her, they’re
hidden somewhere about the room.”

Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and clung to Poirot’s arm.
The latter bent and whispered something in the girl’s ear. She
looked up at him doubtfully.

“_Si, si, mon enfant_—I assure you it is better not to resist.”
Then he turned to the inspector. “You permit, monsieur? A little
experiment—purely for my own satisfaction.”

“Depends on what it is,” replied the police officer non-committally.

Poirot addressed Célestine once more.

“You have told us that you went into your room to fetch a reel of
cotton. Whereabouts was it?”

“On the top of the chest of drawers, monsieur.”

“And the scissors?”

“They also.”

“Would it be troubling you too much, mademoiselle, to ask you to
repeat those two actions? You were sitting here with your work,
you say?”

Célestine sat down, and then, at a sign from Poirot, rose, passed
into the adjoining room, took up an object from the chest of
drawers, and returned.

Poirot divided his attention between her movements and a large
turnip of a watch which he held in the palm of his hand.

“Again, if you please, mademoiselle.”

At the conclusion of the second performance, he made a note in his
pocket-book, and returned the watch to his pocket.

“Thank you, mademoiselle. And you, monsieur,”—he bowed to the
inspector—“for your courtesy.”

The inspector seemed somewhat entertained by this excessive
politeness. Célestine departed in a flood of tears, accompanied by
the woman and the plain-clothes official.

Then, with a brief apology to Mrs. Opalsen, the inspector set to
work to ransack the room. He pulled out drawers, opened cupboards,
completely unmade the bed, and tapped the floor. Mr. Opalsen looked
on sceptically.

“You really think you will find them?”

“Yes, sir. It stands to reason. She hadn’t time to take them out
of the room. The lady’s discovering the robbery so soon upset her
plans. No, they’re here right enough. One of the two must have
hidden them—and it’s very unlikely for the chambermaid to have done
so.”

“More than unlikely—impossible!” said Poirot quietly.

“Eh?” The inspector stared.

Poirot smiled modestly.

“I will demonstrate. Hastings, my good friend, take my watch in
your hand—with care. It is a family heirloom! Just now I timed
Mademoiselle’s movements—her first absence from the room was of
twelve seconds, her second of fifteen. Now observe my actions.
Madame will have the kindness to give me the key of the jewel-case.
I thank you. My friend Hastings will have the kindness to say
‘Go!’”

“Go!” I said.

With almost incredible swiftness, Poirot wrenched open the drawer
of the dressing-table, extracted the jewel-case, fitted the key in
the lock, opened the case, selected a piece of jewellery, shut and
locked the case, and returned it to the drawer, which he pushed to
again. His movements were like lightning.

“Well, _mon ami_?” he demanded of me breathlessly.

“Forty-six seconds,” I replied.

“You see?” He looked round. “There would not have been time for
the chambermaid even to take the necklace out, far less hide it.”

“Then that settles it on the maid,” said the inspector with
satisfaction, and returned to his search. He passed into the maid’s
bedroom next door.

Poirot was frowning thoughtfully. Suddenly he shot a question at
Mr. Opalsen.

“This necklace—it was, without doubt, insured?”

Mr. Opalsen looked a trifle surprised at the question.

“Yes,” he said hesitatingly, “that is so.”

“But what does that matter?” broke in Mrs. Opalsen tearfully. “It’s
my necklace I want. It was unique. No money could be the same.”

“I comprehend, madame,” said Poirot soothingly. “I comprehend
perfectly. To _la femme_ sentiment is everything—is it not so? But
monsieur, who has not the so fine susceptibility, will doubtless
find some slight consolation in the fact.”

“Of course, of course,” said Mr. Opalsen rather uncertainly.
“Still——”

He was interrupted by a shout of triumph from the inspector. He
came in dangling something from his fingers.

With a cry, Mrs. Opalsen heaved herself up from her chair. She was
a changed woman.

“Oh, oh, my necklace!”

She clasped it to her breast with both hands. We crowded round.

“Where was it?” demanded Opalsen.

“Maid’s bed. In among the springs of the wire mattress. She must
have stolen it and hidden it there before the chambermaid arrived
on the scene.”

“You permit, madame?” said Poirot gently. He took the necklace from
her and examined it closely; then handed it back with a bow.

“I’m afraid, madam, you’ll have to hand it over to us for the time
being,” said the inspector. “We shall want it for the charge. But
it shall be returned to you as soon as possible.”

Mr. Opalsen frowned.

“Is that necessary?”

“I’m afraid so, sir. Just a formality.”

“Oh, let him take it, Ed!” cried his wife. “I’d feel safer if he
did. I shouldn’t sleep a wink thinking some one else might try and
get hold of it. That wretched girl! And I would never have believed
it of her.”

“There, there, my dear, don’t take on so.”

I felt a gentle pressure on my arm. It was Poirot.

“Shall we slip away, my friend? I think our services are no longer
needed.”

Once outside, however, he hesitated, and then, much to my surprise,
he remarked:

“I should rather like to see the room next door.”

The door was not locked, and we entered. The room, which was a
large double one, was unoccupied. Dust lay about rather noticeably,
and my sensitive friend gave a characteristic grimace as he ran
his finger round a rectangular mark on a table near the window.

“The _service_ leaves to be desired,” he observed dryly.

He was staring thoughtfully out of the window, and seemed to have
fallen into a brown study.

“Well?” I demanded impatiently. “What did we come in here for?”

He started.

“_Je vous demande pardon, mon ami_. I wished to see if the door
was really bolted on this side also.”

“Well,” I said, glancing at the door which communicated with the
room we had just left, “it _is_ bolted.”

Poirot nodded. He still seemed to be thinking.

“And, anyway,” I continued, “what does it matter? The case is over.
I wish you’d had more chance of distinguishing yourself. But it
was the kind of case that even a stiff-backed idiot like that
inspector couldn’t go wrong over.”

Poirot shook his head.

“The case is not over, my friend. It will not be over until we find
out who stole the pearls.”

“But the maid did!”

“Why do you say that?”

“Why,” I stammered, “they were found—actually in her mattress.”

“Ta, ta, ta!” said Poirot impatiently. “Those were not the pearls.”

“What?”

“Imitation, _mon ami_.”

The statement took my breath away. Poirot was smiling placidly.

“The good inspector obviously knows nothing of jewels. But presently
there will be a fine hullabaloo!”

“Come!” I cried, dragging at his arm.

“Where?”

“We must tell the Opalsens at once.”

“I think not.”

“But that poor woman——”

“_Eh bien_; that poor woman, as you call her, will have a much
better night believing the jewels to be safe.”

“But the thief may escape with them!”

“As usual, my friend, you speak without reflection. How do you know
that the pearls Mrs. Opalsen locked up so carefully to-night were
not the false ones, and that the real robbery did not take place
at a much earlier date?”

“Oh!” I said, bewildered.

“Exactly,” said Poirot, beaming. “We start again.”

He led the way out of the room, paused a moment as though
considering, and then walked down to the end of the corridor,
stopping outside the small den where the chambermaids and valets
of the respective floors congregated. Our particular chambermaid
appeared to be holding a small court there, and to be retailing
her late experiences to an appreciative audience. She stopped in
the middle of a sentence. Poirot bowed with his usual politeness.

“Excuse that I derange you, but I shall be obliged if you will
unlock for me the door of Mr. Opalsen’s room.”

The woman rose willingly, and we accompanied her down the passage
again. Mr. Opalsen’s room was on the other side of the corridor,
its door facing that of his wife’s room. The chambermaid unlocked
it with her pass-key, and we entered.

As she was about to depart Poirot detained her.

“One moment; have you ever seen among the effects of Mr. Opalsen
a card like this?”

He held out a plain white card, rather highly glazed and uncommon
in appearance. The maid took it and scrutinized it carefully.

“No, sir, I can’t say I have. But, anyway, the valet has most to
do with the gentlemen’s rooms.”

“I see. Thank you.”

Poirot took back the card. The woman departed. Poirot appeared to
reflect a little. Then he gave a short, sharp nod of the head.

“Ring the bell, I pray of you, Hastings. Three times, for the
valet.”

I obeyed, devoured with curiosity. Meanwhile Poirot had emptied
the waste-paper-basket on the floor, and was swiftly going through
its contents.

In a few moments the valet answered the bell. To him Poirot put
the same question, and handed him the card to examine. But the
response was the same. The valet had never seen a card of that
particular quality among Mr. Opalsen’s belongings. Poirot thanked
him, and he withdrew, somewhat unwillingly, with an inquisitive
glance at the overturned waste-paper-basket and the litter on the
floor. He could hardly have helped overhearing Poirot’s thoughtful
remark as he bundled the torn papers back again:

“And the necklace was heavily insured. . . .”

“Poirot,” I cried,  “I see——”

“You see nothing, my friend,” he replied quickly. “As usual,
nothing at all! It is incredible—but there it is. Let us return to
our own apartments.”

We did so in silence. Once there, to my intense surprise, Poirot
effected a rapid change of clothing.

“I go to London to-night,” he explained. “It is imperative.”

“What?”

“Absolutely. The real work, that of the brain (ah, those brave
little grey cells), it is done. I go to seek the confirmation. I
shall find it! Impossible to deceive Hercule Poirot!”

“You’ll come a cropper one of these days,” I observed, rather
disgusted by his vanity.

“Do not be enraged, I beg of you, _mon ami_. I count on you to do
me a service—of your friendship.”

“Of course,” I said eagerly, rather ashamed of my moroseness. “What
is it?”

“The sleeve of my coat that I have taken off—will you brush it?
See you, a little white powder has clung to it. You without doubt
observed me run my finger round the drawer of the dressing-table?”

“No, I didn’t.”

“You should observe my actions, my friend. Thus I obtained the
powder on my finger, and, being a little over-excited, I rubbed it
on my sleeve; an action without method which I deplore—false to
all my principles.”

“But what was the powder?” I asked, not particularly interested in
Poirot’s principles.

“Not the poison of the Borgias,” replied Poirot, with a twinkle.
“I see your imagination mounting. I should say it was French
chalk.”

“French chalk?”

“Yes, cabinet-makers use it to make drawers run smoothly.”

I laughed.

“You old sinner! I thought you were working up to something
exciting.”

“Au revoir, my friend. I save myself. I fly!”

The door shut behind him. With a smile, half of derision, half of
affection, I picked up the coat, and stretched out my hand for the
clothes-brush.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


The next morning, hearing nothing from Poirot, I went out for a
stroll, met some old friends, and lunched with them at their hotel.
In the afternoon we went for a spin. A punctured tyre delayed us,
and it was past eight when I got back to the _Grand Metropolitan_.

The first sight that met my eyes was Poirot, looking even more
diminutive than usual, sandwiched between the Opalsens, beaming in
a state of placid satisfaction.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings!” he cried, and sprang to meet me. “Embrace
me, my friend; all has marched to a marvel!”

Luckily, the embrace was merely figurative—not a thing one is
always sure of with Poirot.

“Do you mean——” I began.

“Just wonderful, I call it!” said Mrs. Opalsen, smiling all over
her fat face. “Didn’t I tell you, Ed, that if he couldn’t get back
my pearls nobody would?”

“You did, my dear, you did. And you were right.”

I looked helplessly at Poirot, and he answered the glance.

“My friend Hastings is, as you say in England, all at the seaside.
Seat yourself, and I will recount to you all the affair that has
so happily ended.”

“Ended?”

“But yes. They are arrested.”

“Who are arrested?”

“The chambermaid and the valet, _parbleu_! You did not suspect?
Not with my parting hint about the French chalk?”

“You said cabinet-makers used it.”

“Certainly they do—to make drawers slide easily. Somebody wanted
that drawer to slide in and out without any noise. Who could that
be? Obviously, only the chambermaid. The plan was so ingenious that
it did not at once leap to the eye—not even to the eye of Hercule
Poirot.

“Listen, this was how it was done. The valet was in the empty room
next door, waiting. The French maid leaves the room. Quick as a
flash the chambermaid whips open the drawer, takes out the
jewel-case, and, slipping back the bolt, passes it through the
door. The valet opens it at his leisure with the duplicate key with
which he has provided himself, extracts the necklace, and waits
his time. Célestine leaves the room again, and—pst!—in a flash the
case is passed back again and replaced in the drawer.

“Madame arrives, the theft is discovered. The chambermaid demands
to be searched, with a good deal of righteous indignation, and
leaves the room without a stain on her character. The imitation
necklace with which they have provided themselves has been concealed
in the French girl’s bed that morning by the chambermaid—a master
stroke, _ça!_”

“But what did you go to London for?”

“You remember the card?”

“Certainly. It puzzled me—and puzzles me still. I thought——”

I hesitated delicately, glancing at Mr. Opalsen.

Poirot laughed heartily.

“_Une blague!_ For the benefit of the valet. The card was one with
a specially prepared surface—for finger-prints. I went straight
to Scotland Yard, asked for our old friend Inspector Japp, and laid
the facts before him. As I had suspected, the finger-prints proved
to be those of two well-known jewel thieves who have been ‘wanted’
for some time. Japp came down with me, the thieves were arrested,
and the necklace was discovered in the valet’s possession. A clever
pair, but they failed in _method_. Have I not told you, Hastings,
at least thirty-six times, that without method——”

“At least thirty-six thousand times!” I interrupted. “But where
did their ‘method’ break down?”

“_Mon ami_, it is a good plan to take a place as chambermaid or
valet—but you must not shirk your work. They left an empty room
undusted; and therefore, when the man put down the jewel-case on
the little table near the communicating door, it left a square
mark——”

“I remember,” I cried.

“Before, I was undecided. Then—I _knew_!” There was a moment’s
silence.

“And I’ve got my pearls,” said Mrs. Opalsen as a sort of Greek
chorus.

“Well,” I said, “I’d better have some dinner.” Poirot accompanied
me.

“This ought to mean kudos for you,” I observed.

“_Pas du tout_,” replied Poirot tranquilly. “Japp and the local
inspector will divide the credit between them. But”—he tapped his
pocket—“I have a cheque here, from Mr. Opalsen, and, how say you,
my friend? This week-end has not gone according to plan. Shall we
return here next week-end—at my expense this time?”




  VIII


  The Kidnapped Prime Minister


Now that war and the problems of war are things of the past, I
think I may safely venture to reveal to the world the part which
my friend Poirot played in a moment of national crisis. The secret
has been well guarded. Not a whisper of it reached the Press. But,
now that the need for secrecy has gone by, I feel it is only just
that England should know the debt it owes to my quaint little
friend, whose marvellous brain so ably averted a great catastrophe.

One evening after dinner—I will not particularize the date; it
suffices to say that it was at the time when “Peace by negotiation”
was the parrot-cry of England’s enemies—my friend and I were
sitting in his rooms. After being invalided out of the Army I had
been given a recruiting job, and it had become my custom to drop
in on Poirot in the evenings after dinner and talk with him of any
cases of interest that he might have on hand.

I was attempting to discuss with him the sensational news of that
day—no less than an attempted assassination of Mr. David MacAdam,
England’s Prime Minister. The account in the papers had evidently
been carefully censored. No details were given, save that the Prime
Minister had had a marvellous escape, the bullet just grazing his
cheek.

I considered that our police must have been shamefully careless
for such an outrage to be possible. I could well understand that
the German agents in England would be willing to risk much for such
an achievement. “Fighting Mac,” as his own party had nicknamed him,
had strenuously and unequivocally combated the Pacifist influence
which was becoming so prevalent.

He was more than England’s Prime Minister—he _was_ England; and
to have removed him from his sphere of influence would have been
a crushing and paralysing blow to Britain.

Poirot was busy mopping a grey suit with a minute sponge. Never
was there a dandy such as Hercule Poirot. Neatness and order were
his passion. Now, with the odour of benzine filling the air, he
was quite unable to give me his full attention.

“In a little minute I am with you, my friend. I have all but
finished. The spot of grease—he is not good—I remove him—so!” He
waved his sponge.

I smiled as I lit another cigarette.

“Anything interesting on?” I inquired, after a minute or two.

“I assist a—how do you call it?—‘charlady’ to find her husband. A
difficult affair, needing the tact. For I have a little idea that
when he is found he will not be pleased. What would you? For my
part, I sympathize with him. He was a man of discrimination to lose
himself.”

I laughed.

“At last! The spot of grease, he is gone! I am at your disposal.”

“I was asking you what you thought of this attempt to assassinate
MacAdam?”

“_Enfantillage!_” replied Poirot promptly. “One can hardly take it
seriously. To fire with the rifle—never does it succeed. It is a
device of the past.”

“It was very near succeeding this time,” I reminded him.

Poirot shook his head impatiently. He was about to reply when the
landlady thrust her head round the door and informed him that there
were two gentlemen below who wanted to see him.

“They won’t give their names, sir, but they says as it’s very
important.”

“Let them mount,” said Poirot, carefully folding his grey trousers.

In a few minutes the two visitors were ushered in, and my heart
gave a leap as in the foremost I recognized no less a personage
than Lord Estair, Leader of the House of Commons; whilst his
companion, Mr. Bernard Dodge, was also a member of the War Cabinet,
and, as I knew, a close personal friend of the Prime Minister.

“Monsieur Poirot?” said Lord Estair interrogatively. My friend
bowed. The great man looked at me and hesitated. “My business is
private.”

“You may speak freely before Captain Hastings,” said my friend,
nodding to me to remain. “He has not all the gifts, no! But I
answer for his discretion.”

Lord Estair still hesitated, but Mr. Dodge broke in abruptly:

“Oh, come on—don’t let’s beat about the bush! As far as I can see,
the whole of England will know the hole we’re in soon enough.
Time’s everything.”

“Pray be seated, messieurs,” said Poirot politely. “Will you take
the big chair, _milord_?”

Lord Estair started slightly. “You know me?”

Poirot smiled. “Certainly. I read the little papers with the
pictures. How should I not know you?”

“Monsieur Poirot, I have come to consult you upon a matter of the
most vital urgency. I must ask for absolute secrecy.”

“You have the word of Hercule Poirot—I can say no more!” said my
friend grandiloquently.

“It concerns the Prime Minister. We are in grave trouble.”

“We’re up a tree!” interposed Mr. Dodge.

“The injury is serious, then?” I asked.

“What injury?”

“The bullet wound.”

“Oh, that!” cried Mr. Dodge contemptuously. “That’s old history.”

“As my colleague says,” continued Lord Estair, “that affair is over
and done with. Luckily, it failed. I wished I could say as much
for the second attempt.”

“There has been a second attempt, then?”

“Yes, though not of the same nature. Monsieur Poirot, the Prime
Minister has disappeared.”

“What?”

“He has been kidnapped!”

“Impossible!” I cried, stupefied.

Poirot threw a withering glance at me, which I knew enjoined me to
keep my mouth shut.

“Unfortunately, impossible as it seems, it is only too true,”
continued his lordship.

Poirot looked at Mr. Dodge. “You said just now, monsieur, that time
was everything. What did you mean by that?”

The two men exchanged glances, and then Lord Estair said:

“You have heard, Monsieur Poirot, of the approaching Allied
Conference?”

My friend nodded.

“For obvious reasons, no details have been given of when and where
it is to take place. But, although it has been kept out of the
newspapers, the date is, of course, widely known in diplomatic
circles. The Conference is to be held to-morrow—Thursday—evening
at Versailles. Now you perceive the terrible gravity of the
situation. I will not conceal from you that the Prime Minister’s
presence at the Conference is a vital necessity. The Pacifist
propaganda, started and maintained by the German agents in our
midst, has been very active. It is the universal opinion that the
turning point of the Conference will be the strong personality of
the Prime Minister. His absence may have the most serious
results—possibly a premature and disastrous peace. And we have no
one who can be sent in his place. He alone can represent England.”

Poirot’s face had grown very grave. “Then you regard the kidnapping
of the Prime Minister as a direct attempt to prevent his being
present at the Conference?”

“Most certainly I do. He was actually on his way to France at the
time.”

“And the Conference is to be held?”

“At nine o’clock to-morrow night.”

Poirot drew an enormous watch from his pocket.

“It is now a quarter to nine.”

“Twenty-four hours,” said Mr. Dodge thoughtfully.

“And a quarter,” amended Poirot. “Do not forget the quarter,
monsieur—it may come in useful. Now for the details—the abduction,
did it take place in England or in France?”

“In France. Mr. MacAdam crossed to France this morning. He was to
stay to-night as the guest of the Commander-in-Chief, proceeding
to-morrow to Paris. He was conveyed across the Channel by destroyer.
At Boulogne he was met by a car from General Headquarters and one
of the Commander-in-Chief’s A.D.C.s.”

“_Eh bien_?”

“Well, they started from Boulogne—but they never arrived.”

“What?”

“Monsieur Poirot, it was a bogus car and a bogus A.D.C. The real
car was found in a side road, with the chauffeur and the A.D.C.
neatly gagged and bound.”

“And the bogus car?”

“Is still at large.”

Poirot made a gesture of impatience. “Incredible! Surely it cannot
escape attention for long?”

“So we thought. It seemed merely a question of searching thoroughly.
That part of France is under Military Law. We were convinced that
the car could not go long unnoticed. The French police and our own
Scotland Yard men, and the military are straining every nerve. It
is, as you say, incredible—but nothing has been discovered!”

At that moment a tap came at the door, and a young officer entered
with a heavily sealed envelope which he handed to Lord Estair.

“Just through from France, sir. I brought it on here, as you
directed.”

The Minister tore it open eagerly, and uttered an exclamation. The
officer withdrew.

“Here is news at last! This telegram has just been decoded. They
have found the second car, also the secretary, Daniels, chloroformed,
gagged, and bound, in an abandoned farm near C——. He remembers
nothing, except something being pressed against his mouth and nose
from behind, and struggling to free himself. The police are
satisfied as to the genuineness of his statement.”

“And they have found nothing else?”

“No.”

“Not the Prime Minister’s dead body? Then, there is hope. But it
is strange. Why, after trying to shoot him this morning, are they
now taking so much trouble to keep him alive?”

Dodge shook his head. “One thing’s quite certain. They’re determined
at all costs to prevent his attending the Conference.”

“If it is humanly possible, the Prime Minister shall be there. God
grant it is not too late. Now, messieurs, recount to me
everything—from the beginning. I must know about this shooting
affair as well.”

“Last night, the Prime Minister, accompanied by one of his
secretaries, Captain Daniels——”

“The same who accompanied him to France?”

“Yes. As I was saying, they motored down to Windsor, where the
Prime Minister was granted an Audience. Early this morning, he
returned to town, and it was on the way that the attempted
assassination took place.”

“One moment, if you please. Who is this Captain Daniels? You have
his dossier?”

Lord Estair smiled. “I thought you would ask me that. We do not
know very much of him. He is of no particular family. He has served
in the English Army, and is an extremely able secretary, being an
exceptionally fine linguist. I believe he speaks seven languages.
It is for that reason that the Prime Minister chose him to accompany
him to France.”

“Has he any relatives in England?”

“Two aunts. A Mrs. Everard, who lives at Hampstead, and a Miss
Daniels, who lives near Ascot.”

“Ascot? That is near to Windsor, is it not?”

“That point has not been overlooked. But it has led to nothing.”

“You regard the Capitaine Daniels, then, as above suspicion?”

A shade of bitterness crept into Lord Estair’s voice, as he replied:

“No, Monsieur Poirot. In these days, I should hesitate before I
pronounced _anyone_ above suspicion.”

“_Très bien_. Now I understand, _milord_, that the Prime Minister
would, as a matter of course, be under vigilant police protection,
which ought to render any assault upon him an impossibility?”

Lord Estair bowed his head. “That is so. The Prime Minister’s car
was closely followed by another car containing detectives in plain
clothes. Mr. MacAdam knew nothing of these precautions. He is
personally a most fearless man, and would be inclined to sweep them
away arbitrarily. But, naturally, the police make their own
arrangements. In fact, the Premier’s chauffeur, O’Murphy, is a
C.I.D. man.”

“O’Murphy? That is a name of Ireland, is it not so?”

“Yes, he is an Irishman.”

“From what part of Ireland?”

“County Clare, I believe.”

“_Tiens!_ But proceed, _milord_.”

“The Premier started for London. The car was a closed one. He and
Captain Daniels sat inside. The second car followed as usual. But,
unluckily, for some unknown reason, the Prime Minister’s car
deviated from the main road——”

“At a point where the road curves?” interrupted Poirot.

“Yes—but how did you know?”

“Oh, _c’est évident_! Continue!”

“For some unknown reason,” continued Lord Estair, “the Premier’s
car left the main road. The police car, unaware of the deviation,
continued to keep to the high road. At a short distance down the
unfrequented lane, the Prime Minister’s car was suddenly held up
by a band of masked men. The chauffeur——”

“That brave O’Murphy!” murmured Poirot thoughtfully.

“The chauffeur, momentarily taken aback, jammed on the brakes. The
Prime Minister put his head out of the window. Instantly a shot
rang out—then another. The first one grazed his cheek, the second,
fortunately, went wide. The chauffeur, now realizing the danger,
instantly forged straight ahead, scattering the band of men.”

“A near escape,” I ejaculated, with a shiver.

“Mr. MacAdam refused to make any fuss over the slight wound he had
received. He declared it was only a scratch. He stopped at a local
cottage hospital, where it was dressed and bound up—he did not, of
course, reveal his identity. He then drove, as per schedule,
straight to Charing Cross, where a special train for Dover was
awaiting him, and, after a brief account of what had happened had
been given to the anxious police by Captain Daniels, he duly
departed for France. At Dover, he went on board the waiting
destroyer. At Boulogne, as you know, the bogus car was waiting for
him, carrying the Union Jack, and correct in every detail.”

“That is all you have to tell me?”

“Yes.”

“There is no other circumstance that you have omitted, milord?”

“Well, there is one rather peculiar thing.”

“Yes?”

“The Prime Minister’s car did not return home after leaving the
Prime Minister at Charing Cross. The police were anxious to
interview O’Murphy, so a search was instituted at once. The car
was discovered standing outside a certain unsavoury little
restaurant in Soho, which is well known as a meeting-place of
German agents.”

“And the chauffeur?”

“The chauffeur was nowhere to be found. He, too, had disappeared.”

“So,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “there are two disappearances: the
Prime Minister in France, and O’Murphy in London.”

He looked keenly at Lord Estair, who made a gesture of despair.

“I can only tell you, Monsieur Poirot, that, if anyone had suggested
to me yesterday that O’Murphy was a traitor, I should have laughed
in his face.”

“And to-day?”

“To-day I do not know what to think.”

Poirot nodded gravely. He looked at his turnip of a watch again.

“I understand that I have carte blanche, messieurs—in every way,
I mean? I must be able to go where I choose, and how I choose.”

“Perfectly. There is a special train leaving for Dover in an hour’s
time, with a further contingent from Scotland Yard. You shall be
accompanied by a Military officer and a C.I.D. man, who will hold
themselves at your disposal in every way. Is that satisfactory?”

“Quite. One more question before you leave, messieurs. What made
you come to me? I am unknown, obscure, in this great London of
yours.”

“We sought you out on the express recommendation and wish of a very
great man of your own country.”

“_Comment?_ My old friend the _Préfet_——?”

Lord Estair shook his head.

“One higher than the _Préfet_. One whose word was once law in
Belgium—and shall be again! That England has sworn!”

Poirot’s hand flew swiftly to a dramatic salute. “Amen to that!
Ah, but my Master does not forget. . . . Messieurs, I, Hercule
Poirot, will serve you faithfully. Heaven only send that it will
be in time. But this is dark—dark. . . . I cannot see.”

“Well, Poirot,” I cried impatiently, as the door closed behind the
Ministers, “what do you think?”

My friend was busy packing a minute suitcase, with quick, deft
movements. He shook his head thoughtfully.

“I do not know what to think. My brains desert me.”

“Why, as you said, kidnap him, when a knock on the head would do
as well?” I mused.

“Pardon me, _mon ami_, but I did not quite say that. It is
undoubtedly far more their affair to kidnap him.”

“But why?”

“Because uncertainty creates panic. That is one reason. Were the
Prime Minister dead, it would be a terrible calamity, but the
situation would have to be faced. But now you have paralysis. Will
the Prime Minister reappear, or will he not? Is he dead or alive?
Nobody knows, and until they know nothing definite can be done.
And, as I tell you, uncertainty breeds panic, which is what _les
Boches_ are playing for. Then, again, if the kidnappers are holding
him secretly somewhere, they have the advantage of being able to
make terms with both sides. The German Government is not a liberal
paymaster, as a rule, but no doubt they can be made to disgorge
substantial remittances in such a case as this. Thirdly, they run
no risk of the hangman’s rope. Oh, decidedly, kidnapping is their
affair.”

“Then, if that is so, why should they first try to shoot him?”

Poirot made a gesture of anger. “Ah, that is just what I do not
understand! It is inexplicable—stupid! They have all their
arrangements made (and very good arrangements too!) for the
abduction, and yet they imperil the whole affair by a melodramatic
attack, worthy of a Cinema, and quite as unreal. It is almost
impossible to believe in it, with its band of masked men, not
twenty miles from London!”

“Perhaps they were two quite separate attempts which happened
irrespective of each other,” I suggested.

“Ah, no, that would be too much of a coincidence! Then, further—who
is the traitor? There must have been a traitor—in the first affair,
anyway. But who was it—Daniels or O’Murphy? It must have been one
of the two, or why did the car leave the main road? We cannot
suppose that the Prime Minister connived at his own assassination!
Did O’Murphy take that turning of his own accord, or was it Daniels
who told him to do so?”

“Surely it must have been O’Murphy’s doing.”

“Yes, because if it was Daniels’ the Prime Minister would have
heard the order, and would have asked the reason. But there are
altogether too many ‘whys’ in this affair, and they contradict each
other. If O’Murphy is an honest man, _why_ did he leave the main
road? But if he was a dishonest man, _why_ did he start the car
again when only two shots had been fired—thereby, in all probability,
saving the Prime Minister’s life? And, again, if he was honest,
why did he, immediately on leaving Charing Cross, drive to a
well-known rendezvous of German spies?”

“It looks bad,” I said.

“Let us look at the case with method. What have we for and against
these two men? Take O’Murphy first. Against: that his conduct in
leaving the main road was suspicious; that he is an Irishman from
County Clare; that he has disappeared in a highly suggestive
manner. For: that his promptness in restarting the car saved the
Premier’s life; that he is a Scotland Yard man, and, obviously,
from the post allotted to him, a trusted detective. Now for Daniels.
There is not much against him, except the fact that nothing is
known of his antecedents, and that he speaks too many languages
for a good Englishman! (Pardon me, _mon ami_, but, as linguists,
you are deplorable!) _Now for him_, we have the fact that he was
found gagged, bound, and chloroformed—which does not look as though
he had anything to do with the matter.”

“He might have gagged and bound himself, to divert suspicion.”

Poirot shook his head. “The French police would make no mistake of
that kind. Besides, once he had attained his object, and the Prime
Minister was safely abducted, there would not be much point in his
remaining behind. His accomplices _could_ have gagged and
chloroformed him, of course, but I fail to see what object they
hoped to accomplish by it. He can be of little use to them now,
for, until the circumstances concerning the Prime Minister have
been cleared up, he is bound to be closely watched.”

“Perhaps he hoped to start the police on a false scent?”

“Then why did he not do so? He merely says that something was
pressed over his nose and mouth, and that he remembers nothing
more. There is no false scent there. It sounds remarkably like the
truth.”

“Well,” I said, glancing at the clock, “I suppose we’d better start
for the station. You may find more clues in France.”

“Possibly, _mon ami_, but I doubt it. It is still incredible to me
that the Prime Minister has not been discovered in that limited
area, where the difficulty of concealing him must be tremendous.
If the military and the police of two countries have not found him,
how shall I?”

At Charing Cross we were met by Mr. Dodge.

“This is Detective Barnes, of Scotland Yard, and Major Norman. They
will hold themselves entirely at your disposal. Good luck to you.
It’s a bad business, but I’ve not given up hope. Must be off now.”
And the Minister strode rapidly away.

We chatted in a desultory fashion with Major Norman. In the centre
of the little group of men on the platform I recognized a little
ferret-faced fellow talking to a tall, fair man. He was an old
acquaintance of Poirot’s—Detective-Inspector Japp, supposed to be
one of the smartest of Scotland Yard’s officers. He came over and
greeted my friend cheerfully.

“I heard you were on this job too. Smart bit of work. So far
they’ve got away with the goods all right. But I can’t believe they
can keep him hidden long. Our people are going through France with
a toothcomb. So are the French. I can’t help feeling it’s only a
matter of hours now.”

“That is, if he’s still alive,” remarked the tall detective
gloomily.

Japp’s face fell. “Yes. . . . But somehow I’ve got the feeling he’s
alive all right.”

Poirot nodded. “Yes, yes; he’s alive. But can he be found in time?
I, like you, did not believe he could be hidden so long.”

The whistle blew, and we all trooped up into the Pullman car. Then,
with a slow, unwilling jerk, the train drew out of the station.

It was a curious journey. The Scotland Yard men crowded together.
Maps of Northern France were spread out, and eager forefingers
traced the lines of roads and villages. Each man had his own pet
theory. Poirot showed none of his usual loquacity, but sat staring
in front of him, with an expression on his face that reminded me
of a puzzled child. I talked to Norman, whom I found quite an
amusing fellow. On arriving at Dover Poirot’s behaviour moved me
to intense amusement. The little man, as he went on board the boat,
clutched desperately at my arm. The wind was blowing lustily.

“_Mon Dieu!_” he murmured. “This is terrible!”

“Have courage, Poirot,” I cried. “You will succeed. You will find
him. I am sure of it.”

“Ah, _mon ami_, you mistake my emotion. It is this villainous sea
that troubles me! The _mal de mer_—it is horrible suffering!”

“Oh!” I said, rather taken aback.

The first throb of the engines was felt, and Poirot groaned and
closed his eyes.

“Major Norman has a map of Northern France if you would like to
study it?”

Poirot shook his head impatiently.

“But no, but no! Leave me, my friend. See you, to think, the
stomach and the brain must be in harmony. Laverguier has a method
most excellent for averting the _mal de mer_. You breathe in—and
out—slowly, so—turning the head from left to right and counting
six between each breath.”

I left him to his gymnastic endeavours, and went on deck.

As we came slowly into Boulogne Harbour Poirot appeared, neat and
smiling, and announced to me in a whisper that Laverguier’s system
had succeeded “to a marvel!”

Japp’s forefinger was still tracing imaginary routes on his map.
“Nonsense! The car started from Boulogne—here they branched off.
Now, my idea is that they transferred the Prime Minister to another
car. See?”

“Well,” said the tall detective, “I shall make for the seaports.
Ten to one, they’ve smuggled him on board a ship.”

Japp shook his head. “Too obvious. The order went out at once to
close all the ports.”

The day was just breaking as we landed. Major Norman touched Poirot
on the arm. “There’s a military car here waiting for you, sir.”

“Thank you, monsieur. But, for the moment, I do not propose to
leave Boulogne.”

“What?”

“No, we will enter this hotel here, by the quay.”

He suited the action to the word, demanded and was accorded a
private room. We three followed him, puzzled and uncomprehending.

He shot a quick glance at us. “It is not so that the good detective
should act, eh? I perceive your thought. He must be full of energy.
He must rush to and fro. He should prostrate himself on the dusty
road and seek the marks of tyres through a little glass. He must
gather up the cigarette-end, the fallen match? That is your idea,
is it not?”

His eyes challenged us. “But I—Hercule Poirot—tell you that it is
not so! The true clues are within—_here_!” He tapped his forehead.
“See you, I need not have left London. It would have been sufficient
for me to sit quietly in my rooms there. All that matters is the
little grey cells within. Secretly and silently they do their part,
until suddenly I call for a map, and I lay my finger on a
spot—so—and I say: the Prime Minister is _there_! And it is so!
With method and logic one can accomplish anything! This frantic
rushing to France was a mistake—it is playing a child’s game of
hide-and-seek. But now, though it may be too late, I will set to
work the right way, from within. Silence, my friends, I beg of
you.”

And for five long hours the little man sat motionless, blinking
his eyelids like a cat, his green eyes flickering and becoming
steadily greener and greener. The Scotland Yard man was obviously
contemptuous, Major Norman was bored and impatient, and I myself
found the time pass with wearisome slowness.

Finally, I got up, and strolled as noiselessly as I could to the
window. The matter was becoming a farce. I was secretly concerned
for my friend. If he failed, I would have preferred him to fail in
a less ridiculous manner. Out of the window I idly watched the
daily leave boat, belching forth columns of smoke, as she lay
alongside the quay.

Suddenly I was aroused by Poirot’s voice close to my elbow.

“_Mes amis_, let us start!”

I turned. An extraordinary transformation had come over my friend.
His eyes were flickering with excitement, his chest was swelled to
the uttermost.

“I have been an imbecile, my friends! But I see daylight at last.”

Major Norman moved hastily to the door. “I’ll order the car.”

“There is no need. I shall not use it. Thank Heaven the wind has
fallen.”

“Do you mean you are going to walk, sir?”

“No, my young friend. I am no St. Peter. I prefer to cross the sea
by boat.”

“To cross the _sea_?”

“Yes. To work with method, one must begin from the beginning. And
the beginning of this affair was in England. Therefore, we return
to England.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


At three o’clock, we stood once more upon Charing Cross platform.
To all our expostulations, Poirot turned a deaf ear, and reiterated
again and again that to start at the beginning was not a waste of
time, but the only way. On the way over, he had conferred with
Norman in a low voice, and the latter had despatched a sheaf of
telegrams from Dover.

Owing to the special passes held by Norman, we got through
everywhere in record time. In London, a large police car was
waiting for us, with some plain-clothes men, one of whom handed a
typewritten sheet of paper to my friend. He answered my inquiring
glance.

“A list of the cottage hospitals within a certain radius west of
London. I wired for it from Dover.”

We were whirled rapidly through the London streets. We were on the
Bath Road. On we went, through Hammersmith, Chiswick and Brentford.
I began to see our objective. Through Windsor and on to Ascot. My
heart gave a leap. Ascot was where Daniels had an aunt living. We
were after _him_, then, not O’Murphy.

We duly stopped at the gate of a trim villa. Poirot jumped out and
rang the bell. I saw a perplexed frown dimming the radiance of his
face. Plainly, he was not satisfied. The bell was answered. He was
ushered inside. In a few moments he reappeared, and climbed into
the car with a short, sharp shake of his head. My hopes began to
die down. It was past four now. Even if he found certain evidence
incriminating Daniels, what would be the good of it, unless he
could wring from some one the exact spot in France where they were
holding the Prime Minister?

Our return progress towards London was an interrupted one. We
deviated from the main road more than once, and occasionally
stopped at a small building, which I had no difficulty in
recognizing as a cottage hospital. Poirot only spent a few minutes
at each, but at every halt his radiant assurance was more and more
restored.

He whispered something to Norman, to which the latter replied:

“Yes, if you turn off to the left, you will find them waiting by
the bridge.”

We turned up a side road, and in the failing light I discerned a
second car, waiting by the side of the road. It contained two men
in plain clothes. Poirot got down and spoke to them, and then we
started off in a northerly direction, the other car following close
behind.

We drove for some time, our objective being obviously one of the
northern suburbs of London. Finally, we drove up to the front door
of a tall house, standing a little back from the road in its own
grounds.

Norman and I were left with the car. Poirot and one of the
detectives went up to the door and rang. A neat parlourmaid opened
it. The detective spoke.

“I am a police officer, and I have a warrant to search this house.”

The girl gave a little scream, and a tall, handsome woman of
middle-age appeared behind her in the hall.

“Shut the door, Edith. They are burglars, I expect.”

But Poirot swiftly inserted his foot in the door, and at the same
moment blew a whistle. Instantly the other detectives ran up, and
poured into the house, shutting the door behind them.

Norman and I spent about five minutes cursing our forced inactivity.
Finally the door reopened, and the men emerged, escorting three
prisoners—a woman and two men. The woman, and one of the men, were
taken to the second car. The other man was placed in our car by
Poirot himself.

“I must go with the others, my friend. But have great care of this
gentleman. You do not know him, no? _Eh bien_, let me present to
you, Monsieur O’Murphy!”

O’Murphy! I _gaped_ at him open-mouthed as we started again. He
was not handcuffed, but I did not fancy he would try to escape. He
sat there staring in front of him as though dazed. Anyway, Norman
and I would be more than a match for him.

To my surprise, we still kept a northerly route. We were not
returning to London, then! I was much puzzled. Suddenly, as the
car slowed down, I recognized that we were close to Hendon
Aerodrome. Immediately I grasped Poirot’s idea. He proposed to
reach France by aeroplane.

It was a sporting idea, but, on the face of it, impracticable. A
telegram would be far quicker. Time was everything. He must leave
the personal glory of rescuing the Prime Minister to others.

As we drew up, Major Norman jumped out, and a plain-clothes man
took his place. He conferred with Poirot for a few minutes, and
then went off briskly.

I, too, jumped out, and caught Poirot by the arm.

“I congratulate you, old fellow! They have told you the hiding-place?
But, look here, you must wire to France at once. You’ll be too late
if you go yourself.”

Poirot looked at me curiously for a minute or two.

“Unfortunately, my friend, there are some things that cannot be
sent by telegram.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


At that moment Major Norman returned, accompanied by a young
officer in the uniform of the Flying Corps.

“This is Captain Lyall, who will fly you over to France. He can
start at once.”

“Wrap up warmly, sir,” said the young pilot. “I can lend you a
coat, if you like.”

Poirot was consulting his enormous watch. He murmured to himself:
“Yes, there is time—just time.” Then he looked up, and bowed
politely to the young officer. “I thank you, monsieur. But it is
not I who am your passenger. It is this gentleman here.”

He moved a little aside as he spoke, and a figure came forward out
of the darkness. It was the second male prisoner who had gone in
the other car, and as the light fell on his face, I gave a gasp of
surprise.

_It was the Prime Minister!_


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


“For Heaven’s sake, tell me all about it,” I cried impatiently, as
Poirot, Norman, and I motored back to London. “How in the world
did they manage to smuggle him back to England?”

“There was no need to smuggle him back,” replied Poirot dryly. “The
Prime Minister has never left England. He was kidnapped on his way
from Windsor to London.”

“What?”

“I will make all clear. The Prime Minister was in his car, his
secretary beside him. Suddenly a pad of chloroform is clapped on
his face——”

“But by whom?”

“By the clever linguistic Captain Daniels. As soon as the Prime
Minister is unconscious, Daniels picks up the speaking-tube, and
directs O’Murphy to turn to the right, which the chauffeur, quite
unsuspicious, does. A few yards down that unfrequented road, a
large car is standing, apparently broken down. Its driver signals
to O’Murphy to stop. O’Murphy slows up. The stranger approaches.
Daniels leans out of the window, and, probably with the aid of an
instantaneous anæsthetic, such as ethylchloride, the chloroform
trick is repeated. In a few seconds, the two helpless men are
dragged out and transferred to the other car, and a pair of
substitutes take their places.”

“Impossible!”

“_Pas du tout!_ Have you not seen music-hall turns imitating
celebrities with marvellous accuracy? Nothing is easier than to
personate a public character. The Prime Minister of England is far
easier to understudy than Mr. John Smith of Clapham, say. As for
O’Murphy’s ‘double,’ no one was going to take much notice of him
until after the departure of the Prime Minister, and by then he
would have made himself scarce. He drives straight from Charing
Cross to the meeting-place of his friends. He goes in as O’Murphy,
he emerges as some one quite different. O’Murphy has disappeared,
leaving a conveniently suspicious trail behind him.”

“But the man who personated the Prime Minister was seen by every
one!”

“He was not seen by anyone who knew him privately or intimately.
And Daniels shielded him from contact with anyone as much as
possible. Moreover, his face was bandaged up, and anything unusual
in his manner would be put down to the fact that he was suffering
from shock as a result of the attempt upon his life. Mr. MacAdam
has a weak throat, and always spares his voice as much as possible
before any great speech. The deception was perfectly easy to keep
up as far as France. There it would be impracticable and
impossible—so the Prime Minister disappears. The police of this
country hurry across the Channel, and no one bothers to go into
the details of the first attack. To sustain the illusion that the
abduction has taken place in France, Daniels is gagged and
chloroformed in a convincing manner.”

“And the man who has enacted the part of the Prime Minister?”

“Rids himself of his disguise. He and the bogus chauffeur may be
arrested as suspicious characters, but no one will dream of
suspecting their real part in the drama, and they will eventually
be released for lack of evidence.”

“And the real Prime Minister?”

“He and O’Murphy were driven straight to the house of ‘Mrs.
Everard,’ at Hampstead, Daniels’ so-called ‘aunt.’ In reality, she
is Frau Bertha Ebenthal, and the police have been looking for her
for some time. It is a valuable little present that I have made to
them—to say nothing of Daniels! Ah, it was a clever plan, but he
did not reckon on the cleverness of Hercule Poirot!”

I think my friend might well be excused his moment of vanity.

“When did you first begin to suspect the truth of the matter?”

“When I began to work the right way—from _within_! I could not make
that shooting affair fit in—but when I saw that the net result of
it was that _the Prime Minister went to France with his face bound
up_ I began to comprehend! And when I visited all the cottage
hospitals between Windsor and London, and found that no one
answering to my description had had his face bound up and dressed
that morning, I was sure! After that, it was child’s-play for a
mind like mine!”

  •   •   •   •   •   •   •

The following morning, Poirot showed me a telegram he had just
received. It had no place of origin, and was unsigned. It ran:

“In time.”

Later in the day the evening papers published an account of the
Allied Conference. They laid particular stress on the magnificent
ovation accorded to Mr. David MacAdam, whose inspiring speech had
produced a deep and lasting impression.




  IX


  The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim


Poirot and I were expecting our old friend Inspector Japp of
Scotland Yard to tea. We were sitting round the tea-table awaiting
his arrival. Poirot had just finished carefully straightening the
cups and saucers which our landlady was in the habit of throwing,
rather than placing, on the table. He had also breathed heavily on
the metal teapot, and polished it with a silk handkerchief. The
kettle was on the boil, and a small enamel saucepan beside it
contained some thick, sweet chocolate which was more to Poirot’s
palate than what he described as “your English poison.” A sharp
“rat-tat” sounded below, and a few minutes afterwards Japp entered
briskly.

“Hope I’m not late,” he said as he greeted us. “To tell the truth,
I was yarning with Miller, the man who’s in charge of the Davenheim
case.”

I pricked up my ears. For the last three days the papers had been
full of the strange disappearance of Mr. Davenheim, senior partner
of Davenheim and Salmon, the well-known bankers and financiers. On
Saturday last he had walked out of his house, and had never been
seen since. I looked forward to extracting some interesting details
from Japp.

“I should have thought,” I remarked, “that it would be almost
impossible for anyone to ‘disappear’ nowadays.”

Poirot moved a plate of bread and butter the eighth of an inch,
and said sharply:

“Be exact, my friend. What do you mean by ‘disappear’? To which
class of disappearance are you referring?”

“Are disappearances classified and labelled, then?” I laughed.

Japp smiled also. Poirot frowned at us both.

“But certainly they are! They fall into three categories: First,
and most common, the voluntary disappearance. Second, the much
abused ‘loss of memory’ case—rare, but occasionally genuine. Third,
murder, and a more or less successful disposal of the body. Do you
refer to all three as impossible of execution?”

“Very nearly so, I should think. You might lose your own memory,
but some one would be sure to recognize you—especially in the case
of a well-known man like Davenheim. Then ‘bodies’ can’t be made to
vanish into thin air. Sooner or later they turn up, concealed in
lonely places, or in trunks. Murder will out. In the same way, the
absconding clerk, or the domestic defaulter, is bound to be run
down in these days of wireless telegraphy. He can be headed off
from foreign countries; ports and railway stations are watched;
and, as for concealment in this country, his features and appearance
will be known to every one who reads a daily newspaper. He’s up
against civilization.”

“_Mon ami_,” said Poirot, “you make one error. You do not allow
for the fact that a man who had decided to make away with another
man—or with himself in a figurative sense—might be that rare
machine, a man of method. He might bring intelligence, talent, a
careful calculation of detail to the task; and then I do not see
why he should not be successful in baffling the police force.”

“But not _you_, I suppose?” said Japp good-humouredly, winking at
me. “He couldn’t baffle _you_, eh, Monsieur Poirot?”

Poirot endeavoured, with a marked lack of success, to look modest.
“Me, also! Why not? It is true that I approach such problems with
an exact science, a mathematical precision, which seems, alas, only
too rare in the new generation of detectives!”

Japp grinned more widely.

“I don’t know,” he said. “Miller, the man who’s on this case, is
a smart chap. You may be very sure he won’t overlook a footprint,
or a cigar-ash, or a crumb even. He’s got eyes that see everything.”

“So, _mon ami_,” said Poirot, “has the London sparrow. But all the
same, I should not ask the little brown bird to solve the problem
of Mr. Davenheim.”

“Come now, monsieur, you’re not going to run down the value of
details as clues?”

“By no means. These things are all good in their way. The danger
is they may assume undue importance. Most details are insignificant;
one or two are vital. It is the brain, the little grey cells”—he
tapped his forehead—“on which one must rely. The senses mislead.
One must seek the truth within—not without.”

“You don’t mean to say, Monsieur Poirot, that you would undertake
to solve a case without moving from your chair, do you?”

“That is exactly what I do mean—granted the facts were placed
before me. I regard myself as a consulting specialist.”

Japp slapped his knee. “Hanged if I don’t take you at your word.
Bet you a fiver that you can’t lay your hand—or rather tell me
where to lay my hand—on Mr. Davenheim, dead or alive, before a week
is out.”

Poirot considered. “_Eh bien, mon ami_, I accept. _Le sport_, it
is the passion of you English. Now—the facts.”

“On Saturday last, as is his usual custom, Mr. Davenheim took the
12.40 train from Victoria to Chingside, where his palatial country
place, The Cedars, is situated. After lunch, he strolled round the
grounds, and gave various directions to the gardeners. Everybody
agrees that his manner was absolutely normal and as usual. After
tea he put his head into his wife’s boudoir, saying that he was
going to stroll down to the village and post some letters. He added
that he was expecting a Mr. Lowen, on business. If he should come
before he himself returned, he was to be shown into the study and
asked to wait. Mr. Davenheim then left the house by the front door,
passed leisurely down the drive, and out at the gate, and—was never
seen again. From that hour, he vanished completely.”

“Pretty—very pretty—altogether a charming little problem,” murmured
Poirot. “Proceed, my good friend.”

“About a quarter of an hour later a tall, dark man with a thick
black moustache rang the front-door bell, and explained that he
had an appointment with Mr. Davenheim. He gave the name of Lowen,
and in accordance with the banker’s instructions was shown into
the study. Nearly an hour passed. Mr. Davenheim did not return.
Finally Mr. Lowen rang the bell, and explained that he was unable
to wait any longer, as he must catch his train back to town. Mrs.
Davenheim apologized for her husband’s absence, which seemed
unaccountable, as she knew him to have been expecting the visitor.
Mr. Lowen reiterated his regrets and took his departure.

“Well, as every one knows, Mr. Davenheim did not return. Early on
Sunday morning the police were communicated with, but could make
neither head nor tail of the matter. Mr. Davenheim seemed literally
to have vanished into thin air. He had not been to the post office;
nor had he been seen passing through the village. At the station
they were positive he had not departed by any train. His own motor
had not left the garage. If he had hired a car to meet him in some
lonely spot, it seems almost certain that by this time, in view of
the large reward offered for information, the driver of it would
have come forward to tell what he knew. True, there was a small
race-meeting at Entfield, five miles away, and if he had walked to
that station he might have passed unnoticed in the crowd. But since
then his photograph and a full description of him have been
circulated in every newspaper, and nobody has been able to give
any news of him. We have, of course, received many letters from
all over England, but each clue, so far, has ended in disappointment.

“On Monday morning a further sensational discovery came to light.
Behind a portière in Mr. Davenheim’s study stands a safe, and that
safe had been broken into and rifled. The windows were fastened
securely on the inside, which seems to put an ordinary burglary
out of court, unless, of course, an accomplice within the house
fastened them again afterwards. On the other hand, Sunday having
intervened, and the household being in a state of chaos, it is
likely that the burglary was committed on the Saturday, and remained
undetected until Monday.”

“_Précisément_,” said Poirot dryly. “Well, is he arrested, _ce
pauvre M. Lowen_?”

Japp grinned. “Not yet. But he’s under pretty close supervision.”

Poirot nodded. “What was taken from the safe? Have you any idea?”

“We’ve been going into that with the junior partner of the firm
and Mrs. Davenheim. Apparently there was a considerable amount in
bearer bonds, and a very large sum in notes, owing to some large
transaction having been just carried through. There was also a
small fortune in jewellery. All Mrs. Davenheim’s jewels were kept
in the safe. The purchasing of them had become a passion with her
husband of late years, and hardly a month passed that he did not
make her a present of some rare and costly gem.”

“Altogether a good haul,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “Now, what
about Lowen? Is it known what his business was with Davenheim that
evening?”

“Well, the two men were apparently not on very good terms. Lowen
is a speculator in quite a small way. Nevertheless, he has been
able once or twice to score a _coup_ off Davenheim in the market,
though it seems they seldom or never actually met. It was a matter
concerning some South American shares which led the banker to make
his appointment.”

“Had Davenheim interests in South America, then?”

“I believe so. Mrs. Davenheim happened to mention that he spent
all last autumn in Buenos Ayres.”

“Any trouble in his home life? Were the husband and wife on good
terms?”

“I should say his domestic life was quite peaceful and uneventful.
Mrs. Davenheim is a pleasant, rather unintelligent woman. Quite a
nonentity, I think.”

“Then we must not look for the solution of the mystery there. Had
he any enemies?”

“He had plenty of financial rivals, and no doubt there are many
people whom he has got the better of who bear him no particular
good-will. But there was no one likely to make away with him—and,
if they had, where is the body?”

“Exactly. As Hastings says, bodies have a habit of coming to light
with fatal persistency.”

“By the way, one of the gardeners says he saw a figure going round
to the side of the house toward the rose-garden. The long French
window of the study opens on to the rose-garden, and Mr. Davenheim
frequently entered and left the house that way. But the man was a
good way off, at work on some cucumber frames, and cannot even say
whether it was the figure of his master or not. Also, he cannot
fix the time with any accuracy. It must have been before six, as
the gardeners cease work at that time.”

“And Mr. Davenheim left the house?”

“About half-past five or thereabouts.”

“What lies beyond the rose-garden?”

“A lake.”

“With a boathouse?”

“Yes, a couple of punts are kept there. I suppose you’re thinking
of suicide, Monsieur Poirot? Well, I don’t mind telling you that
Miller’s going down to-morrow expressly to see that piece of water
dragged. That’s the kind of man he is!”

Poirot smiled faintly, and turned to me. “Hastings, I pray you,
hand me that copy of the _Daily Megaphone_. If I remember rightly,
there is an unusually clear photograph there of the missing man.”

I rose, and found the sheet required. Poirot studied the features
attentively.

“H’m!” he murmured. “Wears his hair rather long and wavy, full
moustache and pointed beard, bushy eyebrows. Eyes dark?”

“Yes.”

“Hair and beard turning grey?”

The detective nodded. “Well, Monsieur Poirot, what have you got to
say to it all? Clear as daylight, eh?”

“On the contrary, most obscure.”

The Scotland Yard man looked pleased.

“Which gives me great hopes of solving it,” finished Poirot
placidly.

“Eh?”

“I find it a good sign when a case is obscure. If a thing is clear
as daylight—_eh bien_, mistrust it! Some one has made it so.”

Japp shook his head almost pityingly. “Well, each to their fancy.
But it’s not a bad thing to see your way clear ahead.”

“I do not see,” murmured Poirot. “I shut my eyes—and think.”

Japp sighed. “Well, you’ve got a clear week to think in.”

“And you will bring me any fresh developments that arise—the result
of the labours of the hard-working and lynx-eyed Inspector Miller,
for instance?”

“Certainly. That’s in the bargain.”

“Seems a shame, doesn’t it?” said Japp to me as I accompanied him
to the door. “Like robbing a child!”

I could not help agreeing with a smile. I was still smiling as I
re-entered the room.

“_Eh bien!_” said Poirot immediately. “You make fun of Papa Poirot,
is it not so?” He shook his finger at me. “You do not trust his
grey cells? Ah, do not be confused! Let us discuss this little
problem—incomplete as yet, I admit, but already showing one or two
points of interest.”

“The lake!” I said significantly.

“And even more than the lake, the boathouse!”

I looked sidewise at Poirot. He was smiling in his most inscrutable
fashion. I felt that, for the moment, it would be quite useless to
question him further.

We heard nothing of Japp until the following evening, when he
walked in about nine o’clock. I saw at once by his expression that
he was bursting with news of some kind.

“_Eh bien_, my friend,” remarked Poirot. “All goes well? But do
not tell me that you have discovered the body of Mr. Davenheim in
your lake, because I shall not believe you.”

“We haven’t found the body, but we did find his _clothes_—the
identical clothes he was wearing that day. What do you say to
that?”

“Any other clothes missing from the house?”

“No, his valet is quite positive on that point. The rest of his
wardrobe is intact. There’s more. We’ve arrested Lowen. One of the
maids, whose business it is to fasten the bedroom windows, declares
that she saw Lowen coming _towards_ the study through the
rose-garden about a quarter past six. That would be about ten
minutes before he left the house.”

“What does he himself say to that?”

“Denied first of all that he had ever left the study. But the maid
was positive, and he pretended afterwards that he had forgotten
just stepping out of the window to examine an unusual species of
rose. Rather a weak story! And there’s fresh evidence against him
come to light. Mr. Davenheim always wore a thick gold ring set with
a solitaire diamond on the little finger of his right hand. Well,
that ring was pawned in London on Saturday night by a man called
Billy Kellett! He’s already known to the police—did three months
last autumn for lifting an old gentleman’s watch. It seems he tried
to pawn the ring at no less than five different places, succeeded
at the last one, got gloriously drunk on the proceeds, assaulted
a policeman, and was run in in consequence. I went to Bow Street
with Miller and saw him. He’s sober enough now, and I don’t mind
admitting we pretty well frightened the life out of him, hinting
he might be charged with murder. This is his yarn, and a very queer
one it is.

“He was at Entfield races on Saturday, though I dare say scarfpins
was his line of business, rather than betting. Anyway, he had a
bad day, and was down on his luck. He was tramping along the road
to Chingside, and sat down in a ditch to rest just before he got
into the village. A few minutes later he noticed a man coming along
the road to the village, ‘dark-complexioned gent, with a big
moustache, one of them city toffs,’ is his description of the man.

“Kellett was half concealed from the road by a heap of stones. Just
before he got abreast of him, the man looked quickly up and down
the road, and seeing it apparently deserted he took a small object
from his pocket and threw it over the hedge. Then he went on
towards the station. Now, the object he had thrown over the hedge
had fallen with a slight ‘chink’ which aroused the curiosity of
the human derelict in the ditch. He investigated and, after a short
search, discovered the ring! That is Kellett’s story. It’s only
fair to say that Lowen denies it utterly, and of course the word
of a man like Kellett can’t be relied upon in the slightest. It’s
within the bounds of possibility that he met Davenheim in the lane
and robbed and murdered him.”

Poirot shook his head.

“Very improbable, _mon ami_. He had no means of disposing of the
body. It would have been found by now. Secondly, the open way in
which he pawned the ring makes it unlikely that he did murder to
get it. Thirdly, your sneak-thief is rarely a murderer. Fourthly,
as he has been in prison since Saturday, it would be too much of
a coincidence that he is able to give so accurate a description of
Lowen.”

Japp nodded. “I don’t say you’re not right. But all the same, you
won’t get a jury to take much note of a jailbird’s evidence. What
seems odd to me is that Lowen couldn’t find a cleverer way of
disposing of the ring.”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. “Well, after all, if it were found
in the neighbourhood, it might be argued that Davenheim himself
had dropped it.”

“But why remove it from the body at all?” I cried.

“There might be a reason for that,” said Japp. “Do you know that
just beyond the lake, a little gate leads out on to the hill, and
not three minutes’ walk brings you to—what do you think?—a _lime
kiln_.”

“Good heavens!” I cried. “You mean that the lime which destroyed
the body would be powerless to affect the metal of the ring?”

“Exactly.”

“It seems to me,” I said, “that that explains everything. What a
horrible crime!”

By common consent we both turned and looked at Poirot. He seemed
lost in reflection, his brow knitted, as though with some supreme
mental effort. I felt that at last his keen intellect was asserting
itself. What would his first words be? We were not long left in
doubt. With a sigh, the tension of his attitude relaxed, and
turning to Japp, he asked:

“Have you any idea, my friend, whether Mr. and Mrs. Davenheim
occupied the same bedroom?”

The question seemed so ludicrously inappropriate that for a moment
we both stared in silence. Then Japp burst into a laugh. “Good
Lord, Monsieur Poirot, I thought you were coming out with something
startling. As to your question, I’m sure I don’t know.”

“You could find out?” asked Poirot with curious persistence.

“Oh, certainly—if you _really_ want to know.”

“_Merci, mon ami_. I should be obliged if you would make a point
of it.”

Japp stared at him a few minutes longer, but Poirot seemed to have
forgotten us both. The detective shook his head sadly at me, and
murmuring, “Poor old fellow! War’s been too much for him!” gently
withdrew from the room.

As Poirot still seemed sunk in a daydream, I took a sheet of paper,
and amused myself by scribbling notes upon it. My friend’s voice
aroused me. He had come out of his reverie, and was looking brisk
and alert.

“_Que faites-vous là, mon ami?_”

“I was jotting down what occurred to me as the main points of
interest in this affair.”

“You become methodical—at last!” said Poirot approvingly.

I concealed my pleasure. “Shall I read them to you?”

“By all means.”

I cleared my throat.

“‘One: All the evidence points to Lowen having been the man who
forced the safe.

“‘Two: He had a grudge against Davenheim.

“‘Three: He lied in his first statement that he had never left the
study.

“‘Four: If you accept Billy Kellett’s story as true, Lowen is
unmistakably implicated.’”

I paused. “Well?” I asked, for I felt that I had put my finger on
all the vital facts.

Poirot looked at me pityingly, shaking his head very gently. “_Mon
pauvre ami!_ But it is that you have not the gift! The important
detail, you appreciate him never! Also, your reasoning is false.”

“How?”

“Let me take your four points.

“One: Mr. Lowen could not possibly know that he would have the
chance to open the safe. He came for a business interview. He could
not know beforehand that Mr. Davenheim would be absent posting a
letter, and that he would consequently be alone in the study!”

“He might have seized his opportunity,” I suggested.

“And the tools? City gentlemen do not carry round housebreaker’s
tools on the off chance! And one could not cut into that safe with
a penknife, _bien entendu_!”

“Well, what about Number Two?”

“You say Lowen had a grudge against Mr. Davenheim. What you mean
is that he had once or twice got the better of him. And presumably
those transactions were entered into with the view of benefiting
himself. In any case you do not as a rule bear a grudge against a
man you have got the better of—it is more likely to be the other
way about. Whatever grudge there might have been would have been
on Mr. Davenheim’s side.”

“Well, you can’t deny that he lied about never having left the
study?”

“No. But he may have been frightened. Remember, the missing man’s
clothes had just been discovered in the lake. Of course, as usual,
he would have done better to speak the truth.”

“And the fourth point?”

“I grant you that. If Kellett’s story is true, Lowen is undeniably
implicated. That is what makes the affair so very interesting.”

“Then I did appreciate _one_ vital fact?”

“Perhaps—but you have entirely overlooked the two most important
points, the ones which undoubtedly hold the clue to the whole
matter.”

“And pray, what are they?”

“One, the passion which has grown upon Mr. Davenheim in the last
few years for buying jewellery. Two, his trip to Buenos Ayres last
autumn.”

“Poirot, you are joking!”

“I am most serious. Ah, sacred thunder, but I hope Japp will not
forget my little commission.”

But the detective, entering into the spirit of the joke, had
remembered it so well that a telegram was handed to Poirot about
eleven o’clock the next day. At his request I opened it and read
it out:

“‘Husband and wife have occupied separate rooms since last winter.’”

“Aha!” cried Poirot. “And now we are in mid June! All is solved!”

I stared at him.

“You have no moneys in the bank of Davenheim and Salmon, _mon
ami_?”

“No,” I said, wondering. “Why?”

“Because I should advise you to withdraw it—before it is too
late.”

“Why, what do you expect?”

“I expect a big smash in a few days—perhaps sooner. Which reminds
me, we will return the compliment of a _dépêche_ to Japp. A pencil,
I pray you, and a form. _Voilà!_ ‘Advise you to withdraw any money
deposited with firm in question.’ That will intrigue him, the good
Japp! His eyes will open wide—wide! He will not comprehend in the
slightest—until to-morrow, or the next day!”

I remained sceptical, but the morrow forced me to render tribute
to my friend’s remarkable powers. In every paper was a huge headline
telling of the sensational failure of the Davenheim bank. The
disappearance of the famous financier took on a totally different
aspect in the light of the revelation of the financial affairs of
the bank.

Before we were half-way through breakfast, the door flew open and
Japp rushed in. In his left hand was a paper; in his right was
Poirot’s telegram, which he banged down on the table in front of
my friend.

“How did you know, Monsieur Poirot? How the blazes could you know?”

Poirot smiled placidly at him. “Ah, _mon ami_, after your wire, it
was a certainty! From the commencement, see you, it struck me that
the safe burglary was somewhat remarkable. Jewels, ready money,
bearer bonds—all so conveniently arranged for—whom? Well, the good
Monsieur Davenheim was of those who ‘look after Number One’ as your
saying goes! It seemed almost certain that it was arranged
for—himself! Then his passion of late years for buying jewellery!
How simple! The funds he embezzled, he converted into jewels, very
likely replacing them in turn with paste duplicates, and so he put
away in a safe place, under another name, a considerable fortune
to be enjoyed all in good time when every one has been thrown off
the track. His arrangements completed, he makes an appointment with
Mr. Lowen (who has been imprudent enough in the past to cross the
great man once or twice), drills a hole in the safe, leaves orders
that the guest is to be shown into the study, and walks out of the
house—where?” Poirot stopped, and stretched out his hand for
another boiled egg. He frowned. “It is really insupportable,” he
murmured, “that every hen lays an egg of a different size! What
symmetry can there be on the breakfast table? At least they should
sort them in dozens at the shop!”

“Never mind the eggs,” said Japp impatiently. “Let ’em lay ’em
square if they like. Tell us where our customer went to when he
left The Cedars—that is, if you know!”

“_Eh bien_, he went to his hiding-place. Ah, this Monsieur
Davenheim, there may be some malformation in his grey cells, but
they are of the first quality!”

“Do you know where he is hiding?”

“Certainly! It is most ingenious.”

“For the Lord’s sake, tell us, then!”

Poirot gently collected every fragment of shell from his plate,
placed them in the egg-cup, and reversed the empty egg-shell on
top of them. This little operation concluded, he smiled on the neat
effect, and then beamed affectionately on us both.

“Come, my friends, you are men of intelligence. Ask yourselves the
question which I asked myself. ‘If I were this man, where should
_I_ hide?’ Hastings, what do you say?”

“Well,” I said, “I’m rather inclined to think I’d not do a bolt at
all. I’d stay in London—in the heart of things, travel by tubes
and buses; ten to one I’d never be recognized. There’s safety in
a crowd.”

Poirot turned inquiringly to Japp.

“I don’t agree. Get clear away at once—that’s the only chance. I
would have had plenty of time to prepare things beforehand. I’d
have a yacht waiting, with steam up, and I’d be off to one of the
most out-of-the-way corners of the world before the hue and cry
began!”

We both looked at Poirot. “What do _you_ say, monsieur?”

For a moment he remained silent. Then a very curious smile flitted
across his face.

“My friends, if _I_ were hiding from the police, do you know
_where_ I should hide? _In a prison!_”

“_What?_”

“You are seeking Monsieur Davenheim in order to put him in prison,
so you never dream of looking to see if he may not be already
there!”

“What do you mean?”

“You tell me Madame Davenheim is not a very intelligent woman.
Nevertheless I think that if you took her to Bow Street and
confronted her with the man Billy Kellett, she would recognize him!
In spite of the fact that he has shaved his beard and moustache
and those bushy eyebrows, and has cropped his hair close. A woman
nearly always knows her husband, though the rest of the world may
be deceived!”

“Billy Kellett? But he’s known to the police!”

“Did I not tell you Davenheim was a clever man? He prepared his
alibi long beforehand. He was not in Buenos Ayres last autumn—he
was creating the character of Billy Kellett, ‘doing three months,’
so that the police should have no suspicions when the time came.
He was playing, remember, for a large fortune, as well as liberty.
It was worth while doing the thing thoroughly. Only——”

“Yes?”

“_Eh bien_, afterwards he had to wear a false beard and wig, had
to _make up as himself_ again, and to sleep with a false beard is
not easy—it invites detection! He cannot risk continuing to share
the chamber of madame his wife. You found out for me that for the
last six months, or ever since his supposed return from Buenos
Ayres, he and Mrs. Davenheim occupied separate rooms. Then I was
sure! Everything fitted in. The gardener who fancied he saw his
master going round to the side of the house was quite right. He
went to the boathouse, donned his ‘tramp’ clothes, which you may
be sure had been safely hidden from the eyes of his valet, dropped
the others in the lake, and proceeded to carry out his plan by
pawning the ring in an obvious manner, and then assaulting a
policeman, getting himself safely into the haven of Bow Street,
where nobody would ever dream of looking for him!”

“It’s impossible,” murmured Japp.

“Ask Madame,” said my friend, smiling.

The next day a registered letter lay beside Poirot’s plate. He
opened it, and a five-pound note fluttered out. My friend’s brow
puckered.

“_Ah, sacré!_ But what shall I do with it? I have much remorse!
_Ce pauvre Japp_! Ah, an idea! We will have a little dinner, we
three! That consoles me. It was really too easy. I am ashamed. I,
who would not rob a child—_mille tonnerres! Mon ami_, what have
you, that you laugh so heartily?”




  X


  The Adventure of the Italian Nobleman


Poirot and I had many friends and acquaintances of an informal
nature. Amongst these was to be numbered Dr. Hawker, a near
neighbour of ours, and a member of the medical profession. It was
the genial doctor’s habit to drop in sometimes of an evening and
have a chat with Poirot, of whose genius he was an ardent admirer.
The doctor himself, frank and unsuspicious to the last degree,
admired the talents so far removed from his own.

On one particular evening in early June, he arrived about half-past
eight and settled down to a comfortable discussion on the cheery
topic of the prevalence of arsenical poisoning in crimes. It must
have been about a quarter of an hour later when the door of our
sitting-room flew open, and a distracted female precipitated
herself into the room.

“Oh, doctor, you’re wanted! Such a terrible voice. It gave me a
turn, it did indeed.”

I recognized in our new visitor Dr. Hawker’s housekeeper, Miss
Rider. The doctor was a bachelor, and lived in a gloomy old house
a few streets away. The usually placid Miss Rider was now in a
state bordering on incoherence.

“What terrible voice? Who is it, and what’s the trouble?”

“It was the telephone, doctor. I answered it—and a voice spoke.
‘Help,’ it said. ‘Doctor—help. They’ve killed me!’ Then it sort of
tailed away. ‘Who’s speaking?’ I said. ‘Who’s speaking?’ Then I
got a reply, just a whisper, it seemed, ‘Foscatine’—something like
that—‘Regent’s Court.’”

The doctor uttered an exclamation.

“Count Foscatini. He has a flat in Regent’s Court. I must go at
once. What can have happened?”

“A patient of yours?” asked Poirot.

“I attended him for some slight ailment a few weeks ago. An Italian,
but he speaks English perfectly. Well, I must wish you good night,
Monsieur Poirot, unless——” He hesitated.

“I perceive the thought in your mind,” said Poirot, smiling. “I
shall be delighted to accompany you. Hastings, run down and get
hold of a taxi.”

Taxis always make themselves sought for when one is particularly
pressed for time, but I captured one at last, and we were soon
bowling along in the direction of Regent’s Park. Regent’s Court
was a new block of flats, situated just off St. John’s Wood Road.
They had only recently been built, and contained the latest service
devices.

There was no one in the hall. The doctor pressed the lift-bell
impatiently, and when the lift arrived questioned the uniformed
attendant sharply.

“Flat II. Count Foscatini. There’s been an accident there, I
understand.”

The man stared at him.

“First I’ve heard of it. Mr. Graves—that’s Count Foscatini’s
man—went out about half an hour ago, and he said nothing.”

“Is the Count alone in the flat?”

“No, sir, he’s got two gentlemen dining with him.”

“What are they like?” I asked eagerly.

We were in the lift now, ascending rapidly to the second floor, on
which Flat II was situated.

“I didn’t see them myself, sir, but I understand that they were
foreign gentlemen.”

He pulled back the iron door, and we stepped out on the landing.
No. II was opposite to us. The doctor rang the bell. There was no
reply, and we could hear no sound from within. The doctor rang
again and again; we could hear the bell trilling within, but no
sign of life rewarded us.

“This is getting serious,” muttered the doctor. He turned to the
lift attendant.

“Is there any pass-key to this door?”

“There is one in the porter’s office downstairs.”

“Get it, then, and, look here, I think you’d better send for the
police.”

Poirot approved with a nod of the head.

The man returned shortly; with him came the manager.

“Will you tell me, gentlemen, what is the meaning of all this?”

“Certainly. I received a telephone message from Count Foscatini
stating that he had been attacked and was dying. You can understand
that we must lose no time—if we are not already too late.”

The manager produced the key without more ado, and we all entered
the flat.

We passed first into a small square lounge hall. A door on the
right of it was half open. The manager indicated it with a nod.

“The dining-room.”

Dr. Hawker led the way. We followed close on his heels. As we
entered the room I gave a gasp. The round table in the centre bore
the remains of a meal; three chairs were pushed back, as though
their occupants had just risen. In the corner, to the right of the
fire-place, was a big writing-table, and sitting at it was a man—or
what had been a man. His right hand still grasped the base of the
telephone, but he had fallen forward, struck down by a terrific
blow on the head from behind. The weapon was not far to seek. A
marble statuette stood where it had been hurriedly put down, the
base of it stained with blood.

The doctor’s examination did not take a minute. “Stone dead. Must
have been almost instantaneous. I wonder he even managed to
telephone. It will be better not to move him until the police
arrive.”

On the manager’s suggestion we searched the flat, but the result
was a foregone conclusion. It was not likely that the murderers
would be concealed there when all they had to do was to walk out.

We came back to the dining-room. Poirot had not accompanied us in
our tour. I found him studying the centre table with close
attention. I joined him. It was a well-polished round mahogany
table. A bowl of roses decorated the centre, and white lace mats
reposed on the gleaming surface. There was a dish of fruit, but
the three dessert plates were untouched. There were three
coffee-cups with remains of coffee in them—two black, one with
milk. All three men had taken port, and the decanter, half-full,
stood before the centre plate. One of the men had smoked a cigar,
the other two cigarettes. A tortoiseshell-and-silver box, holding
cigars and cigarettes, stood open upon the table.

I enumerated all these facts to myself, but I was forced to admit
that they did not shed any brilliant light on the situation. I
wondered what Poirot saw in them to make him so intent. I asked
him.

“_Mon ami_,” he replied, “you miss the point. I am looking for
something that I do _not_ see.”

“What is that?”

“A mistake—even a little mistake—on the part of the murderer.”

He stepped swiftly to the small adjoining kitchen, looked in, and
shook his head.

“Monsieur,” he said to the manager, “explain to me, I pray, your
system of serving meals here.”

The manager stepped to a small hatch in the wall.

“This is the service lift,” he explained. “It runs to the kitchens
at the top of the building. You order through this telephone, and
the dishes are sent down in the lift, one course at a time. The
dirty plates and dishes are sent up in the same manner. No domestic
worries, you understand, and at the same time you avoid the wearying
publicity of always dining in a restaurant.”

Poirot nodded.

“Then the plates and dishes that were used to-night are on high in
the kitchen. You permit that I mount there?”

“Oh, certainly, if you like! Roberts, the lift man, will take you
up and introduce you; but I’m afraid you won’t find anything that’s
of any use. They’re handling hundreds of plates and dishes, and
they’ll be all lumped together.”

Poirot remained firm, however, and together we visited the kitchens
and questioned the man who had taken the order from Flat II.

“The order was given from the _à la carte menu_—for three,” he
explained. “Soup julienne, filet de sole normande, tournedos of
beef, and a rice soufflé. What time? Just about eight o’clock, I
should say. No, I’m afraid the plates and dishes have been all
washed up by now. Unfortunate. You were thinking of finger-prints,
I suppose?”

“Not exactly,” said Poirot, with an enigmatical smile. “I am more
interested in Count Foscatini’s appetite. Did he partake of every
dish?”

“Yes; but of course I can’t say how much of each he ate. The plates
were all soiled, and the dishes empty—that is to say, with the
exception of the rice soufflé. There was a fair amount of that
left.”

“Ah!” said Poirot, and seemed satisfied with the fact.

As we descended to the flat again he remarked in a low tone:

“We have decidedly to do with a man of method.”

“Do you mean the murderer, or Count Foscatini?”

“The latter was undoubtedly an orderly gentleman. After imploring
help and announcing his approaching demise, he carefully hung up
the telephone receiver.”

I stared at Poirot. His words now and his recent inquiries gave me
the glimmering of an idea.

“You suspect poison?” I breathed. “The blow on the head was a
blind.”

Poirot merely smiled.

We re-entered the flat to find the local inspector of police had
arrived with two constables. He was inclined to resent our
appearance, but Poirot calmed him with the mention of our Scotland
Yard friend, Inspector Japp, and we were accorded a grudging
permission to remain. It was a lucky thing we were, for we had not
been back five minutes before an agitated middle-aged man came
rushing into the room with every appearance of grief and agitation.

This was Graves, valet-butler to the late Count Foscatini. The
story he had to tell was a sensational one.

On the previous morning, two gentlemen had called to see his
master. They were Italians, and the elder of the two, a man of
about forty, gave his name as Signor Ascanio. The younger was a
well-dressed lad of about twenty-four.

Count Foscatini was evidently prepared for their visit and
immediately sent Graves out upon some trivial errand. Here the man
paused and hesitated in his story. In the end, however, he admitted
that, curious as to the purport of the interview, he had not obeyed
immediately, but had lingered about endeavouring to hear something
of what was going on.

The conversation was carried on in so low a tone that he was not
as successful as he had hoped; but he gathered enough to make it
clear that some kind of monetary proposition was being discussed,
and that the basis of it was a threat. The discussion was anything
but amicable. In the end, Count Foscatini raised his voice slightly,
and the listener heard these words clearly:

“I have no time to argue further now, gentlemen. If you will dine
with me to-morrow night at eight o’clock, we will resume the
discussion.”

Afraid of being discovered listening, Graves had then hurried out
to do his master’s errand. This evening the two men had arrived
punctually at eight. During dinner they had talked of indifferent
matters—politics, the weather, and the theatrical world. When
Graves had placed the port upon the table and brought in the coffee
his master told him that he might have the evening off.

“Was that a usual proceeding of his when he had guests?” asked the
inspector.

“No, sir; it wasn’t. That’s what made me think it must be some
business of a very unusual kind that he was going to discuss with
these gentlemen.”

That finished Graves’s story. He had gone out about 8.30, and,
meeting a friend, had accompanied him to the Metropolitan Music
Hall in Edgware Road.

Nobody had seen the two men leave, but the time of the murder was
fixed clearly enough at 8.47. A small clock on the writing-table
had been swept off by Foscatini’s arm, and had stopped at that
hour, which agreed with Miss Rider’s telephone summons.

The police surgeon had made his examination of the body, and it
was now lying on the couch. I saw the face for the first time—the
olive complexion, the long nose, the luxuriant black moustache,
and the full red lips drawn back from the dazzlingly white teeth.
Not altogether a pleasant face.

“Well,” said the inspector, refastening his notebook. “The case
seems clear enough. The only difficulty will be to lay our hands
on this Signor Ascanio. I suppose his address is not in the dead
man’s pocket-book by any chance?”

As Poirot had said, the late Foscatini was an orderly man. Neatly
written in small, precise handwriting was the inscription, “Signor
Paolo Ascanio, Grosvenor Hotel.”

The inspector busied himself with the telephone, then turned to us
with a grin.

“Just in time. Our fine gentleman was off to catch the boat train
to the Continong. Well, gentlemen, that’s about all we can do here.
It’s a bad business, but straightforward enough. One of these
Italian vendetta things, as likely as not.”

Thus airily dismissed, we found our way downstairs. Dr. Hawker was
full of excitement.

“Like the beginning of a novel, eh? Real exciting stuff. Wouldn’t
believe it if you read about it.”

Poirot did not speak. He was very thoughtful. All the evening he
had hardly opened his lips.

“What says the master detective, eh?” asked Hawker, clapping him
on the back. “Nothing to work your grey cells over this time.”

“You think not?”

“What could there be?”

“Well, for example, there is the window.”

“The window? But it was fastened. Nobody could have got out or in
that way. I noticed it specially.”

“And why were you able to notice it?”

The doctor looked puzzled. Poirot hastened to explain.

“It is to the curtains I refer. They were not drawn. A little odd,
that. And then there was the coffee. It was very black coffee.”

“Well, what of it?”

“Very black,” repeated Poirot. “In conjunction with that let us
remember that very little of the rice soufflé was eaten, and we
get—what?”

“Moonshine,” laughed the doctor. “You’re pulling my leg.”

“Never do I pull the leg. Hastings here knows that I am perfectly
serious.”

“I don’t know what you are getting at, all the same,” I confessed.
“You don’t suspect the manservant, do you? He might have been in
with the gang, and put some dope in the coffee. I suppose they’ll
test his alibi?”

“Without doubt, my friend; but it is the alibi of Signor Ascanio
that interests me.”

“You think he has an alibi?”

“That is just what worries me. I have no doubt that we shall soon
be enlightened on that point.”

The _Daily Newsmonger_ enabled us to become conversant with
succeeding events.

Signor Ascanio was arrested and charged with the murder of Count
Foscatini. When arrested, he denied knowing the Count, and declared
he had never been near Regent’s Court either on the evening of the
crime or on the previous morning. The younger man had disappeared
entirely. Signor Ascanio had arrived alone at the Grosvenor Hotel
from the Continent two days before the murder. All efforts to trace
the second man failed.

Ascanio, however, was not sent for trial. No less a personage than
the Italian Ambassador himself came forward and testified at the
police-court proceedings that Ascanio had been with him at the
Embassy from eight till nine that evening. The prisoner was
discharged. Naturally, a lot of people thought that the crime was
a political one, and was being deliberately hushed up.

Poirot had taken a keen interest in all these points. Nevertheless,
I was somewhat surprised when he suddenly informed me one morning
that he was expecting a visitor at eleven o’clock, and that that
visitor was none other than Ascanio himself.

“He wishes to consult you?”

“_Du tout_, Hastings. I wish to consult him.”

“What about?”

“The Regent’s Court murder.”

“You are going to prove that he did it?”

“A man cannot be tried twice for murder, Hastings. Endeavour to
have the common sense. Ah, that is our friend’s ring.”

A few minutes later Signor Ascanio was ushered in—a small, thin
man with a secretive and furtive glance in his eyes. He remained
standing, darting suspicious glances from one to the other of us.

“Monsieur Poirot?”

My little friend tapped himself gently on the chest.

“Be seated, signor. You received my note. I am determined to get
to the bottom of this mystery. In some small measure you can aid
me. Let us commence. You—in company with a friend—visited the late
Count Foscatini on the morning of Tuesday the 9th——”

The Italian made an angry gesture.

“I did nothing of the sort. I have sworn in court——”

“_Précisément_—and I have a little idea that you have sworn
falsely.”

“You threaten me? Bah! I have nothing to fear from you. I have been
acquitted.”

“Exactly; and as I am not an imbecile, it is not with the gallows
I threaten you—but with publicity. Publicity! I see that you do
not like the word. I had an idea that you would not. My little
ideas, you know, they are very valuable to me. Come, signor, your
only chance is to be frank with me. I do not ask to know whose
indiscretions brought you to England. I know this much, you came
for the especial purpose of seeing Count Foscatini.”

“He was not a count,” growled the Italian.

“I have already noted the fact that his name does not appear in
the _Almanach de Gotha_. Never mind, the title of count is often
useful in the profession of blackmailing.”

“I suppose I might as well be frank. You seem to know a good deal.”

“I have employed my grey cells to some advantage. Come, Signor
Ascanio, you visited the dead man on the Tuesday morning—that is
so, is it not?”

“Yes; but I never went there on the following evening. There was
no need. I will tell you all. Certain information concerning a man
of great position in Italy had come into this scoundrel’s
possession. He demanded a big sum of money in return for the
papers. I came over to England to arrange the matter. I called upon
him by appointment that morning. One of the young secretaries of
the Embassy was with me. The Count was more reasonable than I had
hoped, although even then the sum of money I paid him was a huge
one.”

“Pardon, how was it paid?”

“In Italian notes of comparatively small denomination. I paid over
the money then and there. He handed me the incriminating papers.
I never saw him again.”

“Why did you not say all this when you were arrested?”

“In my delicate position I was forced to deny any association with
the man.”

“And how do you account for the events of the evening, then?”

“I can only think that some one must have deliberately impersonated
me. I understand that no money was found in the flat.”

Poirot looked at him and shook his head.

“Strange,” he murmured. “We all have the little grey cells. And so
few of us know how to use them. Good morning, Signor Ascanio. I
believe your story. It is very much as I had imagined. But I had
to make sure.”

After bowing his guest out, Poirot returned to his arm-chair and
smiled at me.

“Let us hear M. le Capitaine Hastings on the case?”

“Well, I suppose Ascanio is right—somebody impersonated him.”

“Never, never will you use the brains the good God has given you.
Recall to yourself some words I uttered after leaving the flat that
night. I referred to the window-curtains not being drawn. We are
in the month of June. It is still light at eight o’clock. The light
is failing by half-past. _Ça vous dit quelque chose?_ I perceive
a struggling impression that you will arrive some day. Now let us
continue. The coffee was, as I said, very black. Count Foscatini’s
teeth were magnificently white. Coffee stains the teeth. We reason
from that that Count Foscatini did not drink any coffee. Yet there
was coffee in all three cups. Why should anyone pretend Count
Foscatini had drunk coffee when he had not done so?”

I shook my head, utterly bewildered.

“Come, I will help you. What evidence have we that Ascanio and his
friend, or two men posing as them, ever came to the flat that
night? Nobody saw them go in; nobody saw them go out. We have the
evidence of one man and of a host of inanimate objects.”

“You mean?”

“I mean knives and forks and plates and empty dishes. Ah, but it
was a clever idea! Graves is a thief and a scoundrel, but what a
man of method! He overhears a portion of the conversation in the
morning, enough to realize that Ascanio will be in awkward position
to defend himself. The following evening, about eight o’clock, he
tells his master he is wanted at the telephone. Foscatini sits
down, stretches out his hand to the telephone, and from behind
Graves strikes him down with the marble figure. Then quickly to
the service telephone—dinner for three! It comes, he lays the
table, dirties the plates, knives, and forks, etc. But he has to
get rid of the food too. Not only is he a man of brain; he has a
resolute and capacious stomach! But after eating three tournedos,
the rice soufflé is too much for him! He even smokes a cigar and
two cigarettes to carry out the illusion. Ah, but it was
magnificently thorough! Then, having moved on the hands of the
clock to 8.47, he smashes it and stops it. The one thing he does
not do is to draw the curtains. But if there had been a real dinner
party the curtains would have been drawn as soon as the light began
to fail. Then he hurries out, mentioning the guests to the lift
man in passing. He hurries to a telephone box, and as near as
possible to 8.47 rings up the doctor with his master’s dying cry.
So successful is his idea that no one ever inquires if a call was
put through from Flat II at that time.”

“Except Hercule Poirot, I suppose?” I said sarcastically.

“Not even Hercule Poirot,” said my friend, with a smile. “I am
about to inquire now. I had to prove my point to you first. But
you will see, I shall be right; and then Japp, to whom I have
already given a hint, will be able to arrest the respectable
Graves. I wonder how much of the money he has spent.”

Poirot _was_ right. He always is, confound him!




  XI


  The Case of the Missing Will


The problem presented to us by Miss Violet Marsh made rather a
pleasant change from our usual routine work. Poirot had received
a brisk and business-like note from the lady asking for an
appointment, and he had replied asking her to call upon him at
eleven o’clock the following day.

She arrived punctually—a tall, handsome young woman, plainly but
neatly dressed, with an assured and business-like manner. Clearly
a young woman who meant to get on in the world. I am not a great
admirer of the so-called New Woman myself, and, in spite of her
good looks, I was not particularly prepossessed in her favour.

“My business is of a somewhat unusual nature, Monsieur Poirot,”
she began, after she had accepted a chair. “I had better begin at
the beginning and tell you the whole story.”

“If you please, mademoiselle.”

“I am an orphan. My father was one of two brothers, sons of a small
yeoman farmer in Devonshire. The farm was a poor one, and the elder
brother, Andrew, emigrated to Australia, where he did very well
indeed, and by means of successful speculation in land became a
very rich man. The younger brother, Roger (my father), had no
leanings towards the agricultural life. He managed to educate
himself a little, and obtained a post as a clerk with a small firm.
He married slightly above him; my mother was the daughter of a poor
artist. My father died when I was six years old. When I was
fourteen, my mother followed him to the grave. My only living
relation then was my Uncle Andrew, who had recently returned from
Australia and bought a small place, Crabtree Manor, in his native
county. He was exceedingly kind to his brother’s orphan child, took
me to live with him, and treated me in every way as though I was
his own daughter.

“Crabtree Manor, in spite of its name, is really only an old
farmhouse. Farming was in my uncle’s blood, and he was intensely
interested in various modern farming experiments. Although kindness
itself to me, he had certain peculiar and deeply-rooted ideas as
to the up-bringing of women. Himself a man of little or no
education, though possessing remarkable shrewdness, he placed
little value on what he called ‘book knowledge.’ He was especially
opposed to the education of women. In his opinion, girls should
learn practical housework and dairy-work, be useful about the home,
and have as little to do with book learning as possible. He proposed
to bring me up on these lines, to my bitter disappointment and
annoyance. I rebelled frankly. I knew that I possessed a good
brain, and had absolutely no talent for domestic duties. My uncle
and I had many bitter arguments on the subject, for, though much
attached to each other, we were both self-willed. I was lucky
enough to win a scholarship, and up to a certain point was
successful in getting my own way. The crisis arose when I resolved
to go to Girton. I had a little money of my own, left me by my
mother, and I was quite determined to make the best use of the
gifts God had given me. I had one long, final argument with my
uncle. He put the facts plainly before me. He had no other
relations, and he had intended me to be his sole heiress. As I have
told you, he was a very rich man. If I persisted in these
‘new-fangled notions’ of mine, however, I need look for nothing
from him. I remained polite, but firm. I should always be deeply
attached to him, I told him, but I must lead my own life. We parted
on that note. ‘You fancy your brains, my girl,’ were his last
words. ‘I’ve no book learning, but, for all that, I’ll pit mine
against yours any day. We’ll see what we shall see.’

“That was nine years ago. I have stayed with him for a week-end
occasionally, and our relations were perfectly amicable, though
his views remained unaltered. He never referred to my having
matriculated, nor to my B.Sc. For the last three years his health
had been failing, and a month ago he died.

“I am now coming to the point of my visit. My uncle left a most
extraordinary will. By its terms, Crabtree Manor and its contents
are to be at my disposal for a year from his death—‘during which
time my clever niece may prove her wits,’ the actual words run. At
the end of that period, ‘my wits having proved better than hers,’
the house and all my uncle’s large fortune pass to various
charitable institutions.”

“That is a little hard on you, mademoiselle, seeing that you were
Mr. Marsh’s only blood relation.”

“I do not look on it in that way. Uncle Andrew warned me fairly,
and I chose my own path. Since I would not fall in with his wishes,
he was at perfect liberty to leave his money to whom he pleased.”

“Was the will drawn up by a lawyer?”

“No; it was written on a printed will-form and witnessed by the
man and his wife who live in the house and do for my uncle.”

“There might be a possibility of upsetting such a will?”

“I would not even attempt to do such a thing.”

“You regard it, then, as a sporting challenge on the part of your
uncle?”

“That is exactly how I look upon it.”

“It bears that interpretation, certainly,” said Poirot thoughtfully.
“Somewhere in this rambling old manor-house your uncle has concealed
either a sum of money in notes or possibly a second will, and has
given you a year in which to exercise your ingenuity to find it.”

“Exactly, Monsieur Poirot; and I am paying you the compliment of
assuming that your ingenuity will be greater than mine.”

“Eh, eh! but that is very charming of you. My grey cells are at
your disposal. You have made no search yourself?”

“Only a cursory one; but I have too much respect for my uncle’s
undoubted abilities to fancy that the task will be an easy one.”

“Have you the will or a copy of it with you?”

Miss Marsh handed a document across the table. Poirot ran through
it, nodding to himself.

“Made three years ago. Dated March 25; and the time is given
also—11 a.m.—that is very suggestive. It narrows the field of
search. Assuredly it is another will we have to seek for. A will
made even half-an-hour later would upset this. _Eh bien_,
mademoiselle, it is a problem charming and ingenious that you have
presented to me here. I shall have all the pleasure in the world
in solving it for you. Granted that your uncle was a man of ability,
his grey cells cannot have been of the quality of Hercule Poirot’s!”

(Really, Poirot’s vanity is blatant!)

“Fortunately, I have nothing of moment on hand at the minute.
Hastings and I will go down to Crabtree Manor to-night. The man
and wife who attended on your uncle are still there, I presume?”

“Yes, their name is Baker.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


The following morning saw us started on the hunt proper. We had
arrived late the night before. Mr. and Mrs. Baker, having received
a telegram from Miss Marsh, were expecting us. They were a pleasant
couple, the man gnarled and pink-cheeked, like a shrivelled pippin,
and his wife a woman of vast proportions and true Devonshire calm.

Tired with our journey and the eight-mile drive from the station,
we had retired at once to bed after a supper of roast chicken,
apple pie, and Devonshire cream. We had now disposed of an excellent
breakfast, and were sitting in a small panelled room which had been
the late Mr. Marsh’s study and living-room. A roll-top desk stuffed
with papers, all neatly docketed, stood against the wall, and a
big leather armchair showed plainly that it had been its owner’s
constant resting-place. A big chintz-covered settee ran along the
opposite wall, and the deep low window seats were covered with the
same faded chintz of an old-fashioned pattern.

“_Eh bien, mon ami_,” said Poirot, lighting one of his tiny
cigarettes, “we must map out our plan of campaign. Already I have
made a rough survey of the house, but I am of opinion that any clue
will be found in this room. We shall have to go through the
documents in the desk with meticulous care. Naturally, I do not
expect to find the will amongst them; but it is likely that some
apparently innocent paper may conceal the clue to its hiding-place.
But first we must have a little information. Ring the bell, I pray
of you.”

I did so. While we were waiting for it to be answered, Poirot
walked up and down, looking about him approvingly.

“A man of method this Mr. Marsh. See how neatly the packets of
papers are docketed; then the key to each drawer has its ivory
label—so has the key of the china cabinet on the wall; and see
with what precision the china within is arranged. It rejoices the
heart. Nothing here offends the eye——”

He came to an abrupt pause, as his eye was caught by the key of
the desk itself, to which a dirty envelope was affixed. Poirot
frowned at it and withdrew it from the lock. On it were scrawled
the words: “Key of Roll Top Desk,” in a crabbed handwriting, quite
unlike the neat superscriptions on the other keys.

“An alien note,” said Poirot, frowning. “I could swear that here
we have no longer the personality of Mr. Marsh. But who else has
been in the house? Only Miss Marsh, and she, if I mistake not, is
also a young lady of method and order.”

Baker came in answer to the bell.

“Will you fetch madame your wife, and answer a few questions?”

Baker departed, and in a few moments returned with Mrs. Baker,
wiping her hands on her apron and beaming all over her face.

In a few clear words Poirot set forth the object of his mission.
The Bakers were immediately sympathetic.

“Us don’t want to see Miss Violet done out of what’s hers,” declared
the woman. “Cruel hard ’twould be for hospitals to get it all.”

Poirot proceeded with his questions. Yes, Mr. and Mrs. Baker
remembered perfectly witnessing the will. Baker had previously been
sent into the neighbouring town to get two printed will-forms.

“Two?” said Poirot sharply.

“Yes, sir, for safety like, I suppose, in case he should spoil
one—and sure enough, so he did do. Us had signed one——”

“What time of day was that?”

Baker scratched his head, but his wife was quicker.

“Why, to be sure, I’d just put the milk on for the cocoa at eleven.
Don’t ee remember? It had all boiled over on the stove when us got
back to kitchen.”

“And afterwards?”

“’Twould be about an hour later. Us had to go in again. ‘I’ve made
a mistake,’ says old master, ‘had to tear the whole thing up. I’ll
trouble you to sign again,’ and us did. And afterwards master give
us a tidy sum of money each. ‘I’ve left you nothing in my will,’
says he, ‘but each year I live you’ll have this to be a nest-egg
when I’m gone’; and sure enough, so he did.”

Poirot reflected.

“After you had signed the second time, what did Mr. Marsh do? Do
you know?”

“Went out to the village to pay tradesmen’s books.”

That did not seem very promising. Poirot tried another tack. He
held out the key of the desk.

“Is that your master’s writing?”

I may have imagined it, but I fancied that a moment or two elapsed
before Baker replied: “Yes, sir, it is.”

“He’s lying,” I thought. “But why?”

“Has your master let the house?—have there been any strangers in
it during the last three years?”

“No, sir.”

“No visitors?”

“Only Miss Violet.”

“No strangers of any kind been inside this room?”

“No, sir.”

“You forget the workmen, Jim,” his wife reminded him.

“Workmen?” Poirot wheeled round on her. “What workmen?”

The woman explained that about two years and a half ago workmen
had been in the house to do certain repairs. She was quite vague
as to what the repairs were. Her view seemed to be that the whole
thing was a fad of her master’s and quite unnecessary. Part of the
time the workmen had been in the study; but what they had done
there she could not say, as her master had not let either of them
into the room whilst the work was in progress. Unfortunately, they
could not remember the name of the firm employed, beyond the fact
that it was a Plymouth one.

“We progress, Hastings,” said Poirot, rubbing his hands as the
Bakers left the room. “Clearly he made a second will and then had
workmen from Plymouth in to make a suitable hiding-place. Instead
of wasting time taking up the floor and tapping the walls, we will
go to Plymouth.”

With a little trouble, we were able to get the information we
wanted. After one or two essays, we found the firm employed by Mr.
Marsh.

Their employees had all been with them many years, and it was easy
to find the two men who had worked under Mr. Marsh’s orders. They
remembered the job perfectly. Amongst various other minor jobs,
they had taken up one of the bricks of the old-fashioned fireplace,
made a cavity beneath, and so cut the brick that it was impossible
to see the join. By pressing on the second brick from the end, the
whole thing was raised. It had been quite a complicated piece of
work, and the old gentleman had been very fussy about it. Our
informant was a man called Coghan, a big, gaunt man with a grizzled
moustache. He seemed an intelligent fellow.

We returned to Crabtree Manor in high spirits, and, locking the
study door, proceeded to put our newly acquired knowledge into
effect. It was impossible to see any sign on the bricks, but when
we pressed in the manner indicated, a deep cavity was at once
disclosed.

Eagerly Poirot plunged in his hand. Suddenly his face fell from
complacent elation to consternation. All he held was a charred
fragment of stiff paper. But for it, the cavity was empty.

“_Sacré!_” cried Poirot angrily. “Some one has been before us.”

We examined the scrap of paper anxiously. Clearly it was a fragment
of what we sought. A portion of Baker’s signature remained, but no
indication of what the terms of the will had been.

Poirot sat back on his heels. His expression would have been
comical if we had not been so overcome.

“I understand it not,” he growled. “Who destroyed this? And what
was their object?”

“The Bakers?” I suggested.

“_Pourquoi?_ Neither will makes any provision for them, and they
are more likely to be kept on with Miss Marsh than if the place
became the property of a hospital. How could it be to anyone’s
advantage to destroy the will? The hospitals benefit—yes; but one
cannot suspect institutions.”

“Perhaps the old man changed his mind and destroyed it himself,”
I suggested.

Poirot rose to his feet, dusting his knees with his usual care.

“That may be,” he admitted. “One of your more sensible observations,
Hastings. Well, we can do no more here. We have done all that
mortal man can do. We have successfully pitted our wits against
the late Andrew Marsh’s; but, unfortunately, his niece is no better
off for our success.”

By driving to the station at once, we were just able to catch a
train to London, though not the principal express. Poirot was sad
and dissatisfied. For my part, I was tired and dozed in a corner.
Suddenly, as we were just moving out of Taunton, Poirot uttered a
piercing squeal.

“_Vite_, Hastings! Awake and jump! But jump I say!”

Before I knew where I was we were standing on the platform,
bareheaded and minus our valises, whilst the train disappeared into
the night. I was furious. But Poirot paid no attention.

“Imbecile that I have been!” he cried. “Triple imbecile! Not again
will I vaunt my little grey cells!”

“That’s a good job at any rate,” I said grumpily. “But what is this
all about?”

As usual, when following out his own ideas, Poirot paid absolutely
no attention to me.

“The tradesmen’s books—I have left them entirely out of account!
Yes, but where? Where? Never mind, I cannot be mistaken. We must
return at once.”

Easier said than done. We managed to get a slow train to Exeter,
and there Poirot hired a car. We arrived back at Crabtree Manor in
the small hours of the morning. I pass over the bewilderment of
the Bakers when we had at last aroused them. Paying no attention
to anybody, Poirot strode at once to the study.

“I have been, not a triple imbecile, but thirty-six times one, my
friend,” he deigned to remark. “Now, behold!”

Going straight to the desk, he drew out the key, and detached the
envelope from it. I stared at him stupidly. How could he possibly
hope to find a big will-form in that tiny envelope? With great care
he cut open the envelope, laying it out flat. Then he lighted the
fire and held the plain inside surface of the envelope to the
flame. In a few minutes faint characters began to appear.

“Look, _mon ami_!” cried Poirot in triumph.

I looked. There were just a few lines of faint writing stating
briefly that he left everything to his niece, Violet Marsh. It was
dated March 25, 12.30 p.m., and witnessed by Albert Pike,
confectioner, and Jessie Pike, married woman.

“But is it legal?” I gasped.

“As far as I know, there is no law against writing your will in a
blend of disappearing and sympathetic ink. The intention of the
testator is clear, and the beneficiary is his only living relation.
But the cleverness of him! He foresaw every step that a searcher
would take—that I, miserable imbecile, took. He gets two will-forms,
makes the servants sign twice, then sallies out with his will
written on the inside of a dirty envelope and a fountain-pen
containing his little ink mixture. On some excuse he gets the
confectioner and his wife to sign their names under his own
signature, then he ties it to the key of his desk and chuckles to
himself. If his niece sees through his little ruse, she will have
justified her choice of life and elaborate education, and be
thoroughly welcome to his money.”

“She didn’t see through it, did she?” I said slowly. “It seems
rather unfair. The old man really won.”

“But no, Hastings. It is _your_ wits that go astray. Miss Marsh
proved the astuteness of her wits and the value of the higher
education for women by at once putting the matter in _my_ hands.
Always employ the expert. She has amply proved her right to the
money.”

I wonder—I very much wonder—what old Andrew Marsh would have
thought!


  THE END

PLAIN TALES FROM THE HILLS




LISPETH.


     Look, you have cast out Love!  What Gods are these
       You bid me please?
     The Three in One, the One in Three?  Not so!
       To my own Gods I go.
     It may be they shall give me greater ease
     Than your cold Christ and tangled Trinities.

                                      The Convert.


She was the daughter of Sonoo, a Hill-man, and Jadeh his wife. One
year their maize failed, and two bears spent the night in their only
poppy-field just above the Sutlej Valley on the Kotgarth side; so, next
season, they turned Christian, and brought their baby to the Mission
to be baptized. The Kotgarth Chaplain christened her Elizabeth, and
“Lispeth” is the Hill or pahari pronunciation.

Later, cholera came into the Kotgarth Valley and carried off Sonoo and
Jadeh, and Lispeth became half-servant, half-companion to the wife of
the then Chaplain of Kotgarth. This was after the reign of the Moravian
missionaries, but before Kotgarth had quite forgotten her title of
“Mistress of the Northern Hills.”

Whether Christianity improved Lispeth, or whether the gods of her own
people would have done as much for her under any circumstances, I do not
know; but she grew very lovely. When a Hill girl grows lovely, she is
worth traveling fifty miles over bad ground to look upon. Lispeth had a
Greek face--one of those faces people paint so often, and see so seldom.
She was of a pale, ivory color and, for her race, extremely tall. Also,
she possessed eyes that were wonderful; and, had she not been dressed in
the abominable print-cloths affected by Missions, you would, meeting her
on the hill-side unexpectedly, have thought her the original Diana of
the Romans going out to slay.

Lispeth took to Christianity readily, and did not abandon it when she
reached womanhood, as do some Hill girls. Her own people hated her
because she had, they said, become a memsahib and washed herself daily;
and the Chaplain's wife did not know what to do with her. Somehow,
one cannot ask a stately goddess, five foot ten in her shoes, to clean
plates and dishes. So she played with the Chaplain's children and took
classes in the Sunday School, and read all the books in the house, and
grew more and more beautiful, like the Princesses in fairy tales. The
Chaplain's wife said that the girl ought to take service in Simla as a
nurse or something “genteel.” But Lispeth did not want to take service.
She was very happy where she was.

When travellers--there were not many in those years--came to Kotgarth,
Lispeth used to lock herself into her own room for fear they might take
her away to Simla, or somewhere out into the unknown world.

One day, a few months after she was seventeen years old, Lispeth went
out for a walk. She did not walk in the manner of English ladies--a mile
and a half out, and a ride back again. She covered between twenty and
thirty miles in her little constitutionals, all about and about, between
Kotgarth and Narkunda. This time she came back at full dusk, stepping
down the breakneck descent into Kotgarth with something heavy in her
arms. The Chaplain's wife was dozing in the drawing-room when Lispeth
came in breathing hard and very exhausted with her burden. Lispeth put
it down on the sofa, and said simply:

“This is my husband. I found him on the Bagi Road. He has hurt himself.
We will nurse him, and when he is well, your husband shall marry him to
me.”

This was the first mention Lispeth had ever made of her matrimonial
views, and the Chaplain's wife shrieked with horror. However, the man on
the sofa needed attention first. He was a young Englishman, and his head
had been cut to the bone by something jagged. Lispeth said she had found
him down the khud, so she had brought him in. He was breathing queerly
and was unconscious.

He was put to bed and tended by the Chaplain, who knew something of
medicine; and Lispeth waited outside the door in case she could be
useful. She explained to the Chaplain that this was the man she meant
to marry; and the Chaplain and his wife lectured her severely on the
impropriety of her conduct. Lispeth listened quietly, and repeated her
first proposition. It takes a great deal of Christianity to wipe out
uncivilized Eastern instincts, such as falling in love at first sight.
Lispeth, having found the man she worshipped, did not see why she should
keep silent as to her choice. She had no intention of being sent away,
either. She was going to nurse that Englishman until he was well enough
to marry her. This was her little programme.

After a fortnight of slight fever and inflammation, the Englishman
recovered coherence and thanked the Chaplain and his wife, and
Lispeth--especially Lispeth--for their kindness. He was a traveller in
the East, he said--they never talked about “globe-trotters” in those
days, when the P. & O. fleet was young and small--and had come from
Dehra Dun to hunt for plants and butterflies among the Simla hills. No
one at Simla, therefore, knew anything about him. He fancied he must
have fallen over the cliff while stalking a fern on a rotten tree-trunk,
and that his coolies must have stolen his baggage and fled. He thought
he would go back to Simla when he was a little stronger. He desired no
more mountaineering.

He made small haste to go away, and recovered his strength slowly.
Lispeth objected to being advised either by the Chaplain or his wife;
so the latter spoke to the Englishman, and told him how matters stood in
Lispeth's heart. He laughed a good deal, and said it was very pretty and
romantic, a perfect idyl of the Himalayas; but, as he was engaged to a
girl at Home, he fancied that nothing would happen. Certainly he would
behave with discretion. He did that. Still he found it very pleasant to
talk to Lispeth, and walk with Lispeth, and say nice things to her, and
call her pet names while he was getting strong enough to go away. It
meant nothing at all to him, and everything in the world to Lispeth. She
was very happy while the fortnight lasted, because she had found a man
to love.

Being a savage by birth, she took no trouble to hide her feelings, and
the Englishman was amused. When he went away, Lispeth walked with him,
up the Hill as far as Narkunda, very troubled and very miserable. The
Chaplain's wife, being a good Christian and disliking anything in
the shape of fuss or scandal--Lispeth was beyond her management
entirely--had told the Englishman to tell Lispeth that he was coming
back to marry her. “She is but a child, you know, and, I fear, at heart
a heathen,” said the Chaplain's wife. So all the twelve miles up the
hill the Englishman, with his arm around Lispeth's waist, was assuring
the girl that he would come back and marry her; and Lispeth made him
promise over and over again. She wept on the Narkunda Ridge till he had
passed out of sight along the Muttiani path.

Then she dried her tears and went in to Kotgarth again, and said to the
Chaplain's wife: “He will come back and marry me. He has gone to his
own people to tell them so.” And the Chaplain's wife soothed Lispeth
and said: “He will come back.” At the end of two months, Lispeth grew
impatient, and was told that the Englishman had gone over the seas
to England. She knew where England was, because she had read little
geography primers; but, of course, she had no conception of the nature
of the sea, being a Hill girl. There was an old puzzle-map of the World
in the House. Lispeth had played with it when she was a child. She
unearthed it again, and put it together of evenings, and cried to
herself, and tried to imagine where her Englishman was. As she had no
ideas of distance or steamboats, her notions were somewhat erroneous. It
would not have made the least difference had she been perfectly correct;
for the Englishman had no intention of coming back to marry a Hill girl.
He forgot all about her by the time he was butterfly-hunting in Assam.
He wrote a book on the East afterwards. Lispeth's name did not appear.

At the end of three months, Lispeth made daily pilgrimage to Narkunda
to see if her Englishman was coming along the road. It gave her comfort,
and the Chaplain's wife, finding her happier, thought that she was
getting over her “barbarous and most indelicate folly.” A little later
the walks ceased to help Lispeth and her temper grew very bad. The
Chaplain's wife thought this a profitable time to let her know the real
state of affairs--that the Englishman had only promised his love to keep
her quiet--that he had never meant anything, and that it was “wrong and
improper” of Lispeth to think of marriage with an Englishman, who was of
a superior clay, besides being promised in marriage to a girl of his own
people. Lispeth said that all this was clearly impossible, because he
had said he loved her, and the Chaplain's wife had, with her own lips,
asserted that the Englishman was coming back.

“How can what he and you said be untrue?” asked Lispeth.

“We said it as an excuse to keep you quiet, child,” said the Chaplain's
wife.

“Then you have lied to me,” said Lispeth, “you and he?”

The Chaplain's wife bowed her head, and said nothing. Lispeth was
silent, too for a little time; then she went out down the valley, and
returned in the dress of a Hill girl--infamously dirty, but without the
nose and ear rings. She had her hair braided into the long pig-tail,
helped out with black thread, that Hill women wear.

“I am going back to my own people,” said she. “You have killed Lispeth.
There is only left old Jadeh's daughter--the daughter of a pahari and
the servant of Tarka Devi. You are all liars, you English.”

By the time that the Chaplain's wife had recovered from the shock of the
announcement that Lispeth had 'verted to her mother's gods, the girl had
gone; and she never came back.

She took to her own unclean people savagely, as if to make up the
arrears of the life she had stepped out of; and, in a little time, she
married a wood-cutter who beat her, after the manner of paharis, and her
beauty faded soon.

“There is no law whereby you can account for the vagaries of the
heathen,” said the Chaplain's wife, “and I believe that Lispeth was
always at heart an infidel.” Seeing she had been taken into the Church
of England at the mature age of five weeks, this statement does not do
credit to the Chaplain's wife.

Lispeth was a very old woman when she died. She always had a perfect
command of English, and when she was sufficiently drunk, could sometimes
be induced to tell the story of her first love-affair.

It was hard then to realize that the bleared, wrinkled creature, so like
a wisp of charred rag, could ever have been “Lispeth of the Kotgarth
Mission.”




THREE AND--AN EXTRA.


   “When halter and heel ropes are slipped, do not give chase with
   sticks but with gram.”

                                                  Punjabi Proverb.


After marriage arrives a reaction, sometimes a big, sometimes a little
one; but it comes sooner or later, and must be tided over by both
parties if they desire the rest of their lives to go with the current.

In the case of the Cusack-Bremmils this reaction did not set in till the
third year after the wedding. Bremmil was hard to hold at the best
of times; but he was a beautiful husband until the baby died and Mrs.
Bremmil wore black, and grew thin, and mourned as if the bottom of the
universe had fallen out. Perhaps Bremmil ought to have comforted her. He
tried to do so, I think; but the more he comforted the more Mrs. Bremmil
grieved, and, consequently, the more uncomfortable Bremmil grew. The
fact was that they both needed a tonic. And they got it. Mrs. Bremmil
can afford to laugh now, but it was no laughing matter to her at the
time.

You see, Mrs. Hauksbee appeared on the horizon; and where she existed
was fair chance of trouble. At Simla her bye-name was the “Stormy
Petrel.” She had won that title five times to my own certain knowledge.
She was a little, brown, thin, almost skinny, woman, with big, rolling,
violet-blue eyes, and the sweetest manners in the world. You had only to
mention her name at afternoon teas for every woman in the room to rise
up, and call her--well--NOT blessed. She was clever, witty, brilliant,
and sparkling beyond most of her kind; but possessed of many devils of
malice and mischievousness. She could be nice, though, even to her own
sex. But that is another story.

Bremmil went off at score after the baby's death and the general
discomfort that followed, and Mrs. Hauksbee annexed him. She took no
pleasure in hiding her captives. She annexed him publicly, and saw that
the public saw it. He rode with her, and walked with her, and talked
with her, and picnicked with her, and tiffined at Peliti's with her,
till people put up their eyebrows and said: “Shocking!” Mrs. Bremmil
stayed at home turning over the dead baby's frocks and crying into the
empty cradle. She did not care to do anything else. But some eight dear,
affectionate lady-friends explained the situation at length to her in
case she should miss the cream of it. Mrs. Bremmil listened quietly,
and thanked them for their good offices. She was not as clever as Mrs.
Hauksbee, but she was no fool. She kept her own counsel, and did not
speak to Bremmil of what she had heard. This is worth remembering.
Speaking to, or crying over, a husband never did any good yet.

When Bremmil was at home, which was not often, he was more affectionate
than usual; and that showed his hand. The affection was forced partly to
soothe his own conscience and partly to soothe Mrs. Bremmil. It failed
in both regards.

Then “the A.-D.-C. in Waiting was commanded by Their Excellencies, Lord
and Lady Lytton, to invite Mr. and Mrs. Cusack-Bremmil to Peterhoff on
July 26th at 9.30 P. M.”--“Dancing” in the bottom-left-hand corner.

“I can't go,” said Mrs. Bremmil, “it is too soon after poor little
Florrie... but it need not stop you, Tom.”

She meant what she said then, and Bremmil said that he would go just to
put in an appearance. Here he spoke the thing which was not; and Mrs.
Bremmil knew it. She guessed--a woman's guess is much more accurate than
a man's certainty--that he had meant to go from the first, and with Mrs.
Hauksbee. She sat down to think, and the outcome of her thoughts was
that the memory of a dead child was worth considerably less than the
affections of a living husband. She made her plan and staked her
all upon it. In that hour she discovered that she knew Tom Bremmil
thoroughly, and this knowledge she acted on.

“Tom,” said she, “I shall be dining out at the Longmores' on the evening
of the 26th. You'd better dine at the club.”

This saved Bremmil from making an excuse to get away and dine with
Mrs. Hauksbee, so he was grateful, and felt small and mean at the same
time--which was wholesome. Bremmil left the house at five for a ride.
About half-past five in the evening a large leather-covered basket came
in from Phelps' for Mrs. Bremmil. She was a woman who knew how to dress;
and she had not spent a week on designing that dress and having it
gored, and hemmed, and herring-boned, and tucked and rucked (or whatever
the terms are) for nothing. It was a gorgeous dress--slight mourning. I
can't describe it, but it was what The Queen calls “a creation”--a thing
that hit you straight between the eyes and made you gasp. She had not
much heart for what she was going to do; but as she glanced at the long
mirror she had the satisfaction of knowing that she had never looked so
well in her life. She was a large blonde and, when she chose, carried
herself superbly.

After the dinner at the Longmores, she went on to the dance--a little
late--and encountered Bremmil with Mrs. Hauksbee on his arm. That
made her flush, and as the men crowded round her for dances she looked
magnificent. She filled up all her dances except three, and those she
left blank. Mrs. Hauksbee caught her eye once; and she knew it was
war--real war--between them. She started handicapped in the struggle,
for she had ordered Bremmil about just the least little bit in the world
too much; and he was beginning to resent it. Moreover, he had never seen
his wife look so lovely. He stared at her from doorways, and glared at
her from passages as she went about with her partners; and the more he
stared, the more taken was he. He could scarcely believe that this was
the woman with the red eyes and the black stuff gown who used to weep
over the eggs at breakfast.

Mrs. Hauksbee did her best to hold him in play, but, after two dances,
he crossed over to his wife and asked for a dance.

“I'm afraid you've come too late, MISTER Bremmil,” she said, with her
eyes twinkling.

Then he begged her to give him a dance, and, as a great favor, she
allowed him the fifth waltz. Luckily 5 stood vacant on his programme.
They danced it together, and there was a little flutter round the room.
Bremmil had a sort of notion that his wife could dance, but he never
knew she danced so divinely. At the end of that waltz he asked for
another--as a favor, not as a right; and Mrs. Bremmil said: “Show me
your programme, dear!” He showed it as a naughty little schoolboy hands
up contraband sweets to a master. There was a fair sprinkling of “H”
 on it besides “H” at supper. Mrs. Bremmil said nothing, but she smiled
contemptuously, ran her pencil through 7 and 9--two “H's”--and returned
the card with her own name written above--a pet name that only she and
her husband used. Then she shook her finger at him, and said, laughing:
“Oh, you silly, SILLY boy!”

Mrs. Hauksbee heard that, and--she owned as much--felt that she had the
worst of it. Bremmil accepted 7 and 9 gratefully. They danced 7, and
sat out 9 in one of the little tents. What Bremmil said and what Mrs.
Bremmil said is no concern of any one's.

When the band struck up “The Roast Beef of Old England,” the two went
out into the verandah, and Bremmil began looking for his wife's dandy
(this was before 'rickshaw days) while she went into the cloak-room.
Mrs. Hauksbee came up and said: “You take me in to supper, I think, Mr.
Bremmil.” Bremmil turned red and looked foolish. “Ah--h'm! I'm going
home with my wife, Mrs. Hauksbee. I think there has been a little
mistake.” Being a man, he spoke as though Mrs. Hauksbee were entirely
responsible.

Mrs. Bremmil came out of the cloak-room in a swansdown cloak with a
white “cloud” round her head. She looked radiant; and she had a right
to.

The couple went off in the darkness together, Bremmil riding very close
to the dandy.

Then says Mrs. Hauksbee to me--she looked a trifle faded and jaded in
the lamplight: “Take my word for it, the silliest woman can manage a
clever man; but it needs a very clever woman to manage a fool.”

Then we went in to supper.




THROWN AWAY.


     “And some are sulky, while some will plunge
       [So ho!  Steady!  Stand still, you!]
     Some you must gentle, and some you must lunge.
       [There!  There!  Who wants to kill you?]
     Some--there are losses in every trade--
     Will break their hearts ere bitted and made,
     Will fight like fiends as the rope cuts hard,
     And die dumb-mad in the breaking-yard.”

                       Toolungala Stockyard Chorus.


To rear a boy under what parents call the “sheltered life system” is, if
the boy must go into the world and fend for himself, not wise. Unless he
be one in a thousand he has certainly to pass through many unnecessary
troubles; and may, possibly, come to extreme grief simply from ignorance
of the proper proportions of things.

Let a puppy eat the soap in the bath-room or chew a newly-blacked boot.
He chews and chuckles until, by and by, he finds out that blacking and
Old Brown Windsor make him very sick; so he argues that soap and boots
are not wholesome. Any old dog about the house will soon show him the
unwisdom of biting big dogs' ears. Being young, he remembers and goes
abroad, at six months, a well-mannered little beast with a chastened
appetite. If he had been kept away from boots, and soap, and big dogs
till he came to the trinity full-grown and with developed teeth, just
consider how fearfully sick and thrashed he would be! Apply that motion
to the “sheltered life,” and see how it works. It does not sound pretty,
but it is the better of two evils.

There was a Boy once who had been brought up under the “sheltered life”
 theory; and the theory killed him dead. He stayed with his people all
his days, from the hour he was born till the hour he went into Sandhurst
nearly at the top of the list. He was beautifully taught in all that
wins marks by a private tutor, and carried the extra weight of “never
having given his parents an hour's anxiety in his life.” What he learnt
at Sandhurst beyond the regular routine is of no great consequence.
He looked about him, and he found soap and blacking, so to speak, very
good. He ate a little, and came out of Sandhurst not so high as he went
in. Then there was an interval and a scene with his people, who expected
much from him. Next a year of living “unspotted from the world” in a
third-rate depot battalion where all the juniors were children, and all
the seniors old women; and lastly he came out to India, where he was cut
off from the support of his parents, and had no one to fall back on in
time of trouble except himself.

Now India is a place beyond all others where one must not take things
too seriously--the midday sun always excepted. Too much work and too
much energy kill a man just as effectively as too much assorted vice or
too much drink. Flirtation does not matter because every one is being
transferred and either you or she leave the Station, and never return.
Good work does not matter, because a man is judged by his worst output
and another man takes all the credit of his best as a rule. Bad work
does not matter, because other men do worse, and incompetents hang on
longer in India than anywhere else. Amusements do not matter, because
you must repeat them as soon as you have accomplished them once, and
most amusements only mean trying to win another person's money. Sickness
does not matter, because it's all in the day's work, and if you die
another man takes over your place and your office in the eight hours
between death and burial. Nothing matters except Home furlough and
acting allowances, and these only because they are scarce. This is a
slack, kutcha country where all men work with imperfect instruments; and
the wisest thing is to take no one and nothing in earnest, but to escape
as soon as ever you can to some place where amusement is amusement and a
reputation worth the having.

But this Boy--the tale is as old as the Hills--came out, and took all
things seriously. He was pretty and was petted. He took the pettings
seriously, and fretted over women not worth saddling a pony to call
upon. He found his new free life in India very good. It DOES look
attractive in the beginning, from a Subaltern's point of view--all
ponies, partners, dancing, and so on. He tasted it as the puppy tastes
the soap. Only he came late to the eating, with a growing set of
teeth. He had no sense of balance--just like the puppy--and could not
understand why he was not treated with the consideration he received
under his father's roof. This hurt his feelings.

He quarrelled with other boys, and, being sensitive to the marrow,
remembered these quarrels, and they excited him. He found whist, and
gymkhanas, and things of that kind (meant to amuse one after office)
good; but he took them seriously too, just as he took the “head” that
followed after drink. He lost his money over whist and gymkhanas because
they were new to him.

He took his losses seriously, and wasted as much energy and interest
over a two-goldmohur race for maiden ekka-ponies with their manes
hogged, as if it had been the Derby. One-half of this came from
inexperience--much as the puppy squabbles with the corner of the
hearth-rug--and the other half from the dizziness bred by stumbling out
of his quiet life into the glare and excitement of a livelier one. No
one told him about the soap and the blacking because an average man
takes it for granted that an average man is ordinarily careful in regard
to them. It was pitiful to watch The Boy knocking himself to pieces, as
an over-handled colt falls down and cuts himself when he gets away from
the groom.

This unbridled license in amusements not worth the trouble of breaking
line for, much less rioting over, endured for six months--all through
one cold weather--and then we thought that the heat and the knowledge
of having lost his money and health and lamed his horses would sober
The Boy down, and he would stand steady. In ninety-nine cases out of a
hundred this would have happened. You can see the principle working in
any Indian Station. But this particular case fell through because The
Boy was sensitive and took things seriously--as I may have said some
seven times before. Of course, we couldn't tell how his excesses struck
him personally. They were nothing very heart-breaking or above the
average. He might be crippled for life financially, and want a little
nursing. Still the memory of his performances would wither away in
one hot weather, and the shroff would help him to tide over the money
troubles. But he must have taken another view altogether and have
believed himself ruined beyond redemption. His Colonel talked to him
severely when the cold weather ended. That made him more wretched than
ever; and it was only an ordinary “Colonel's wigging!”

What follows is a curious instance of the fashion in which we are all
linked together and made responsible for one another. THE thing that
kicked the beam in The Boy's mind was a remark that a woman made when he
was talking to her. There is no use in repeating it, for it was only a
cruel little sentence, rapped out before thinking, that made him flush
to the roots of his hair. He kept himself to himself for three days, and
then put in for two days' leave to go shooting near a Canal Engineer's
Rest House about thirty miles out. He got his leave, and that night
at Mess was noisier and more offensive than ever. He said that he was
“going to shoot big game”, and left at half-past ten o'clock in an
ekka. Partridge--which was the only thing a man could get near the Rest
House--is not big game; so every one laughed.

Next morning one of the Majors came in from short leave, and heard
that The Boy had gone out to shoot “big game.” The Major had taken an
interest in The Boy, and had, more than once, tried to check him in
the cold weather. The Major put up his eyebrows when he heard of the
expedition and went to The Boy's room, where he rummaged.

Presently he came out and found me leaving cards on the Mess. There was
no one else in the ante-room.

He said: “The Boy has gone out shooting. DOES a man shoot tetur with a
revolver and a writing-case?”

I said: “Nonsense, Major!” for I saw what was in his mind.

He said: “Nonsense or nonsense, I'm going to the Canal now--at once. I
don't feel easy.”

Then he thought for a minute, and said: “Can you lie?”

“You know best,” I answered. “It's my profession.”

“Very well,” said the Major; “you must come out with me now--at
once--in an ekka to the Canal to shoot black-buck. Go and put on
shikar-kit--quick--and drive here with a gun.”

The Major was a masterful man; and I knew that he would not give orders
for nothing. So I obeyed, and on return found the Major packed up in an
ekka--gun-cases and food slung below--all ready for a shooting-trip.

He dismissed the driver and drove himself. We jogged along quietly
while in the station; but as soon as we got to the dusty road across the
plains, he made that pony fly. A country-bred can do nearly anything at
a pinch. We covered the thirty miles in under three hours, but the poor
brute was nearly dead.

Once I said: “What's the blazing hurry, Major?”

He said, quietly: “The Boy has been alone, by himself, for--one, two,
five--fourteen hours now! I tell you, I don't feel easy.”

This uneasiness spread itself to me, and I helped to beat the pony.

When we came to the Canal Engineer's Rest House the Major called for The
Boy's servant; but there was no answer. Then we went up to the house,
calling for The Boy by name; but there was no answer.

“Oh, he's out shooting,” said I.

Just then I saw through one of the windows a little hurricane-lamp
burning. This was at four in the afternoon. We both stopped dead in the
verandah, holding our breath to catch every sound; and we heard, inside
the room, the “brr--brr--brr” of a multitude of flies. The Major said
nothing, but he took off his helmet and we entered very softly.

The Boy was dead on the charpoy in the centre of the bare, lime-washed
room. He had shot his head nearly to pieces with his revolver. The
gun-cases were still strapped, so was the bedding, and on the table lay
The Boy's writing-case with photographs. He had gone away to die like a
poisoned rat!

The Major said to himself softly: “Poor Boy! Poor, POOR devil!” Then he
turned away from the bed and said: “I want your help in this business.”

Knowing The Boy was dead by his own hand, I saw exactly what that help
would be, so I passed over to the table, took a chair, lit a cheroot,
and began to go through the writing-case; the Major looking over my
shoulder and repeating to himself: “We came too late!--Like a rat in a
hole!--Poor, POOR devil!”

The Boy must have spent half the night in writing to his people, and to
his Colonel, and to a girl at Home; and as soon as he had finished, must
have shot himself, for he had been dead a long time when we came in.

I read all that he had written, and passed over each sheet to the Major
as I finished it.

We saw from his accounts how very seriously he had taken everything.
He wrote about “disgrace which he was unable to bear”--“indelible
shame”--“criminal folly”--“wasted life,” and so on; besides a lot of
private things to his Father and Mother too much too sacred to put into
print. The letter to the girl at Home was the most pitiful of all; and
I choked as I read it. The Major made no attempt to keep dry-eyed.
I respected him for that. He read and rocked himself to and fro, and
simply cried like a woman without caring to hide it. The letters were so
dreary and hopeless and touching. We forgot all about The Boy's follies,
and only thought of the poor Thing on the charpoy and the scrawled
sheets in our hands. It was utterly impossible to let the letters go
Home. They would have broken his Father's heart and killed his Mother
after killing her belief in her son.

At last the Major dried his eyes openly, and said: “Nice sort of thing
to spring on an English family! What shall we do?”

I said, knowing what the Major had brought me but for: “The Boy died
of cholera. We were with him at the time. We can't commit ourselves to
half-measures. Come along.”

Then began one of the most grimy comic scenes I have ever taken part
in--the concoction of a big, written lie, bolstered with evidence, to
soothe The Boy's people at Home. I began the rough draft of a letter,
the Major throwing in hints here and there while he gathered up all the
stuff that The Boy had written and burnt it in the fireplace. It was a
hot, still evening when we began, and the lamp burned very badly. In due
course I got the draft to my satisfaction, setting forth how The Boy was
the pattern of all virtues, beloved by his regiment, with every promise
of a great career before him, and so on; how we had helped him through
the sickness--it was no time for little lies, you will understand--and
how he had died without pain. I choked while I was putting down these
things and thinking of the poor people who would read them. Then I
laughed at the grotesqueness of the affair, and the laughter mixed
itself up with the choke--and the Major said that we both wanted drinks.

I am afraid to say how much whiskey we drank before the letter was
finished. It had not the least effect on us. Then we took off The Boy's
watch, locket, and rings.

Lastly, the Major said: “We must send a lock of hair too. A woman values
that.”

But there were reasons why we could not find a lock fit to send. The Boy
was black-haired, and so was the Major, luckily. I cut off a piece of
the Major's hair above the temple with a knife, and put it into the
packet we were making. The laughing-fit and the chokes got hold of me
again, and I had to stop. The Major was nearly as bad; and we both knew
that the worst part of the work was to come.

We sealed up the packet, photographs, locket, seals, ring, letter, and
lock of hair with The Boy's sealing-wax and The Boy's seal.

Then the Major said: “For God's sake let's get outside--away from the
room--and think!”

We went outside, and walked on the banks of the Canal for an hour,
eating and drinking what we had with us, until the moon rose. I know now
exactly how a murderer feels. Finally, we forced ourselves back to the
room with the lamp and the Other Thing in it, and began to take up
the next piece of work. I am not going to write about this. It was too
horrible. We burned the bedstead and dropped the ashes into the Canal;
we took up the matting of the room and treated that in the same way.
I went off to a village and borrowed two big hoes--I did not want the
villagers to help--while the Major arranged--the other matters. It took
us four hours' hard work to make the grave. As we worked, we argued out
whether it was right to say as much as we remembered of the Burial
of the Dead. We compromised things by saying the Lord's Prayer with a
private unofficial prayer for the peace of the soul of The Boy. Then we
filled in the grave and went into the verandah--not the house--to lie
down to sleep. We were dead-tired.

When we woke the Major said, wearily: “We can't go back till to-morrow.
We must give him a decent time to die in. He died early THIS morning,
remember. That seems more natural.” So the Major must have been lying
awake all the time, thinking.

I said: “Then why didn't we bring the body back to the cantonments?”

The Major thought for a minute:--“Because the people bolted when they
heard of the cholera. And the ekka has gone!”

That was strictly true. We had forgotten all about the ekka-pony, and he
had gone home.

So, we were left there alone, all that stifling day, in the Canal Rest
House, testing and re-testing our story of The Boy's death to see if it
was weak at any point. A native turned up in the afternoon, but we said
that a Sahib was dead of cholera, and he ran away. As the dusk gathered,
the Major told me all his fears about The Boy, and awful stories of
suicide or nearly-carried-out suicide--tales that made one's hair crisp.
He said that he himself had once gone into the same Valley of the Shadow
as the Boy, when he was young and new to the country; so he understood
how things fought together in The Boy's poor jumbled head. He also said
that youngsters, in their repentant moments, consider their sins much
more serious and ineffaceable than they really are. We talked together
all through the evening, and rehearsed the story of the death of The
Boy. As soon as the moon was up, and The Boy, theoretically, just
buried, we struck across country for the Station. We walked from eight
till six o'clock in the morning; but though we were dead-tired, we did
not forget to go to The Boy's room and put away his revolver with the
proper amount of cartridges in the pouch. Also to set his writing-case
on the table. We found the Colonel and reported the death, feeling more
like murderers than ever. Then we went to bed and slept the clock round;
for there was no more in us.

The tale had credence as long as was necessary, for every one forgot
about The Boy before a fortnight was over. Many people, however, found
time to say that the Major had behaved scandalously in not bringing in
the body for a regimental funeral. The saddest thing of all was a letter
from The Boy's mother to the Major and me--with big inky blisters all
over the sheet. She wrote the sweetest possible things about our great
kindness, and the obligation she would be under to us as long as she
lived.

All things considered, she WAS under an obligation; but not exactly as
she meant.




MISS YOUGHAL'S SAIS.


      When Man and Woman are agreed, what can the Kazi do?

                                         Mahomedan Proverb.


Some people say that there is no romance in India. Those people are
wrong. Our lives hold quite as much romance as is good for us. Sometimes
more.

Strickland was in the Police, and people did not understand him; so
they said he was a doubtful sort of man and passed by on the other side.
Strickland had himself to thank for this. He held the extraordinary
theory that a Policeman in India should try to know as much about the
natives as the natives themselves. Now, in the whole of Upper India,
there is only ONE man who can pass for Hindu or Mohammedan, chamar or
faquir, as he pleases. He is feared and respected by the natives from
the Ghor Kathri to the Jamma Musjid; and he is supposed to have the gift
of invisibility and executive control over many Devils. But what good
has this done him with the Government? None in the world. He has never
got Simla for his charge; and his name is almost unknown to Englishmen.

Strickland was foolish enough to take that man for his model; and,
following out his absurd theory, dabbled in unsavory places no
respectable man would think of exploring--all among the native
riff-raff. He educated himself in this peculiar way for seven years, and
people could not appreciate it. He was perpetually “going Fantee” among
the natives, which, of course, no man with any sense believes in. He was
initiated into the Sat Bhai at Allahabad once, when he was on leave; he
knew the Lizard-Song of the Sansis, and the Halli-Hukk dance, which is
a religious can-can of a startling kind. When a man knows who dances the
Halli-Hukk, and how, and when, and where, he knows something to be proud
of. He has gone deeper than the skin. But Strickland was not proud,
though he had helped once, at Jagadhri, at the Painting of the Death
Bull, which no Englishman must even look upon; had mastered the
thieves'-patter of the changars; had taken a Eusufzai horse-thief alone
near Attock; and had stood under the mimbar-board of a Border mosque and
conducted service in the manner of a Sunni Mollah.

His crowning achievement was spending eleven days as a faquir in the
gardens of Baba Atal at Amritsar, and there picking up the threads of
the great Nasiban Murder Case. But people said, justly enough: “Why on
earth can't Strickland sit in his office and write up his diary, and
recruit, and keep quiet, instead of showing up the incapacity of his
seniors?” So the Nasiban Murder Case did him no good departmentally;
but, after his first feeling of wrath, he returned to his outlandish
custom of prying into native life. By the way, when a man once acquires
a taste for this particular amusement, it abides with him all his days.
It is the most fascinating thing in the world; Love not excepted. Where
other men took ten days to the Hills, Strickland took leave for what
he called shikar, put on the disguise that appealed to him at the time,
stepped down into the brown crowd, and was swallowed up for a while. He
was a quiet, dark young fellow--spare, black-eyes--and, when he was not
thinking of something else, a very interesting companion. Strickland
on Native Progress as he had seen it was worth hearing. Natives hated
Strickland; but they were afraid of him. He knew too much.

When the Youghals came into the station, Strickland--very gravely, as he
did everything--fell in love with Miss Youghal; and she, after a
while, fell in love with him because she could not understand him. Then
Strickland told the parents; but Mrs. Youghal said she was not going to
throw her daughter into the worst paid Department in the Empire, and old
Youghal said, in so many words, that he mistrusted Strickland's ways
and works, and would thank him not to speak or write to his daughter
any more. “Very well,” said Strickland, for he did not wish to make
his lady-love's life a burden. After one long talk with Miss Youghal he
dropped the business entirely.

The Youghals went up to Simla in April.

In July, Strickland secured three months' leave on “urgent private
affairs.” He locked up his house--though not a native in the Providence
would wittingly have touched “Estreekin Sahib's” gear for the world--and
went down to see a friend of his, an old dyer, at Tarn Taran.

Here all trace of him was lost, until a sais met me on the Simla Mall
with this extraordinary note:


“Dear old man,

“Please give bearer a box of cheroots--Supers, No. I, for preference.
They are freshest at the Club. I'll repay when I reappear; but at
present I'm out of Society.

“Yours,

“E. STRICKLAND.”


I ordered two boxes, and handed them over to the sais with my love. That
sais was Strickland, and he was in old Youghal's employ, attached to
Miss Youghal's Arab. The poor fellow was suffering for an English
smoke, and knew that whatever happened I should hold my tongue till the
business was over.

Later on, Mrs. Youghal, who was wrapped up in her servants, began
talking at houses where she called of her paragon among saises--the man
who was never too busy to get up in the morning and pick flowers for
the breakfast-table, and who blacked--actually BLACKED--the hoofs of his
horse like a London coachman! The turnout of Miss Youghal's Arab was a
wonder and a delight. Strickland--Dulloo, I mean--found his reward
in the pretty things that Miss Youghal said to him when she went out
riding. Her parents were pleased to find she had forgotten all her
foolishness for young Strickland and said she was a good girl.

Strickland vows that the two months of his service were the most rigid
mental discipline he has ever gone through. Quite apart from the little
fact that the wife of one of his fellow-saises fell in love with him and
then tried to poison him with arsenic because he would have nothing
to do with her, he had to school himself into keeping quiet when Miss
Youghal went out riding with some man who tried to flirt with her, and
he was forced to trot behind carrying the blanket and hearing every
word! Also, he had to keep his temper when he was slanged in “Benmore”
 porch by a policeman--especially once when he was abused by a Naik he
had himself recruited from Isser Jang village--or, worse still, when a
young subaltern called him a pig for not making way quickly enough.

But the life had its compensations. He obtained great insight into the
ways and thefts of saises--enough, he says, to have summarily convicted
half the chamar population of the Punjab if he had been on business. He
became one of the leading players at knuckle-bones, which all jhampanis
and many saises play while they are waiting outside the Government House
or the Gaiety Theatre of nights; he learned to smoke tobacco that was
three-fourths cowdung; and he heard the wisdom of the grizzled Jemadar
of the Government House saises, whose words are valuable. He saw many
things which amused him; and he states, on honor, that no man can
appreciate Simla properly, till he has seen it from the sais's point of
view. He also says that, if he chose to write all he saw, his head would
be broken in several places.

Strickland's account of the agony he endured on wet nights, hearing the
music and seeing the lights in “Benmore,” with his toes tingling for a
waltz and his head in a horse-blanket, is rather amusing. One of these
days, Strickland is going to write a little book on his experiences.
That book will be worth buying; and even more, worth suppressing.

Thus, he served faithfully as Jacob served for Rachel; and his leave was
nearly at an end when the explosion came. He had really done his best to
keep his temper in the hearing of the flirtations I have mentioned; but
he broke down at last. An old and very distinguished General took
Miss Youghal for a ride, and began that specially offensive
“you're-only-a-little-girl” sort of flirtation--most difficult for
a woman to turn aside deftly, and most maddening to listen to. Miss
Youghal was shaking with fear at the things he said in the hearing of
her sais. Dulloo--Strickland--stood it as long as he could. Then he
caught hold of the General's bridle, and, in most fluent English,
invited him to step off and be heaved over the cliff. Next minute Miss
Youghal began crying; and Strickland saw that he had hopelessly given
himself away, and everything was over.

The General nearly had a fit, while Miss Youghal was sobbing out the
story of the disguise and the engagement that wasn't recognized by the
parents. Strickland was furiously angry with himself and more angry
with the General for forcing his hand; so he said nothing, but held
the horse's head and prepared to thrash the General as some sort of
satisfaction, but when the General had thoroughly grasped the story, and
knew who Strickland was, he began to puff and blow in the saddle, and
nearly rolled off with laughing. He said Strickland deserved a V. C.,
if it were only for putting on a sais's blanket. Then he called himself
names, and vowed that he deserved a thrashing, but he was too old to
take it from Strickland. Then he complimented Miss Youghal on her lover.
The scandal of the business never struck him; for he was a nice old man,
with a weakness for flirtations. Then he laughed again, and said
that old Youghal was a fool. Strickland let go of the cob's head,
and suggested that the General had better help them, if that was his
opinion. Strickland knew Youghal's weakness for men with titles and
letters after their names and high official position. “It's rather like
a forty-minute farce,” said the General, “but begad, I WILL help, if
it's only to escape that tremendous thrashing I deserved. Go along
to your home, my sais-Policeman, and change into decent kit, and I'll
attack Mr. Youghal. Miss Youghal, may I ask you to canter home and wait?”

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

About seven minutes later, there was a wild hurroosh at the Club. A
sais, with a blanket and head-rope, was asking all the men he knew: “For
Heaven's sake lend me decent clothes!” As the men did not recognize him,
there were some peculiar scenes before Strickland could get a hot bath,
with soda in it, in one room, a shirt here, a collar there, a pair
of trousers elsewhere, and so on. He galloped off, with half the Club
wardrobe on his back, and an utter stranger's pony under him, to the
house of old Youghal. The General, arrayed in purple and fine linen, was
before him. What the General had said Strickland never knew, but Youghal
received Strickland with moderate civility; and Mrs. Youghal, touched
by the devotion of the transformed Dulloo, was almost kind. The General
beamed, and chuckled, and Miss Youghal came in, and almost before old
Youghal knew where he was, the parental consent had been wrenched out
and Strickland had departed with Miss Youghal to the Telegraph Office
to wire for his kit. The final embarrassment was when an utter stranger
attacked him on the Mall and asked for the stolen pony.

So, in the end, Strickland and Miss Youghal were married, on the strict
understanding that Strickland should drop his old ways, and stick to
Departmental routine, which pays best and leads to Simla. Strickland
was far too fond of his wife, just then, to break his word, but it was
a sore trial to him; for the streets and the bazars, and the sounds in
them, were full of meaning to Strickland, and these called to him to
come back and take up his wanderings and his discoveries. Some day, I
will tell you how he broke his promise to help a friend. That was long
since, and he has, by this time, been nearly spoilt for what he would
call shikar. He is forgetting the slang, and the beggar's cant, and the
marks, and the signs, and the drift of the undercurrents, which, if a
man would master, he must always continue to learn.

But he fills in his Departmental returns beautifully.




YOKED WITH AN UNBELIEVER.


     I am dying for you, and you are dying for another.

                                       Punjabi Proverb.


When the Gravesend tender left the P. & O. steamer for Bombay and went
back to catch the train to Town, there were many people in it crying.
But the one who wept most, and most openly was Miss Agnes Laiter. She
had reason to cry, because the only man she ever loved--or ever could
love, so she said--was going out to India; and India, as every one
knows, is divided equally between jungle, tigers, cobras, cholera, and
sepoys.

Phil Garron, leaning over the side of the steamer in the rain, felt very
unhappy too; but he did not cry. He was sent out to “tea.” What “tea”
 meant he had not the vaguest idea, but fancied that he would have to
ride on a prancing horse over hills covered with tea-vines, and draw a
sumptuous salary for doing so; and he was very grateful to his uncle
for getting him the berth. He was really going to reform all his slack,
shiftless ways, save a large proportion of his magnificent salary
yearly, and, in a very short time, return to marry Agnes Laiter. Phil
Garron had been lying loose on his friends' hands for three years, and,
as he had nothing to do, he naturally fell in love. He was very nice;
but he was not strong in his views and opinions and principles, and
though he never came to actual grief his friends were thankful when
he said good-bye, and went out to this mysterious “tea” business near
Darjiling. They said:--“God bless you, dear boy! Let us never see your
face again,”--or at least that was what Phil was given to understand.

When he sailed, he was very full of a great plan to prove himself
several hundred times better than any one had given him credit for--to
work like a horse, and triumphantly marry Agnes Laiter. He had many good
points besides his good looks; his only fault being that he was weak,
the least little bit in the world weak. He had as much notion of economy
as the Morning Sun; and yet you could not lay your hand on any one item,
and say: “Herein Phil Garron is extravagant or reckless.” Nor could
you point out any particular vice in his character; but he was
“unsatisfactory” and as workable as putty.

Agnes Laiter went about her duties at home--her family objected to the
engagement--with red eyes, while Phil was sailing to Darjiling--“a port
on the Bengal Ocean,” as his mother used to tell her friends. He was
popular enough on board ship, made many acquaintances and a moderately
large liquor bill, and sent off huge letters to Agnes Laiter at each
port. Then he fell to work on this plantation, somewhere between
Darjiling and Kangra, and, though the salary and the horse and the work
were not quite all he had fancied, he succeeded fairly well, and gave
himself much unnecessary credit for his perseverance.

In the course of time, as he settled more into collar, and his work grew
fixed before him, the face of Agnes Laiter went out of his mind and only
came when he was at leisure, which was not often. He would forget
all about her for a fortnight, and remember her with a start, like a
school-boy who has forgotten to learn his lesson. She did not forget
Phil, because she was of the kind that never forgets. Only, another
man--a really desirable young man--presented himself before Mrs. Laiter;
and the chance of a marriage with Phil was as far off as ever; and
his letters were so unsatisfactory; and there was a certain amount of
domestic pressure brought to bear on the girl; and the young man really
was an eligible person as incomes go; and the end of all things was that
Agnes married him, and wrote a tempestuous whirlwind of a letter to Phil
in the wilds of Darjiling, and said she should never know a happy moment
all the rest of her life. Which was a true prophecy.

Phil got that letter, and held himself ill-treated. This was two years
after he had come out; but by dint of thinking fixedly of Agnes Laiter,
and looking at her photograph, and patting himself on the back for being
one of the most constant lovers in history, and warming to the work as
he went on, he really fancied that he had been very hardly used. He sat
down and wrote one final letter--a really pathetic “world without end,
amen,” epistle; explaining how he would be true to Eternity, and that
all women were very much alike, and he would hide his broken heart,
etc., etc.; but if, at any future time, etc., etc., he could afford to
wait, etc., etc., unchanged affections, etc., etc., return to her old
love, etc., etc., for eight closely-written pages. From an artistic
point of view, it was very neat work, but an ordinary Philistine, who
knew the state of Phil's real feelings--not the ones he rose to as he
went on writing--would have called it the thoroughly mean and selfish
work of a thoroughly mean and selfish, weak man. But this verdict would
have been incorrect. Phil paid for the postage, and felt every word he
had written for at least two days and a half. It was the last flicker
before the light went out.

That letter made Agnes Laiter very unhappy, and she cried and put it
away in her desk, and became Mrs. Somebody Else for the good of her
family. Which is the first duty of every Christian maid.

Phil went his ways, and thought no more of his letter, except as an
artist thinks of a neatly touched-in sketch. His ways were not bad, but
they were not altogether good until they brought him across Dunmaya, the
daughter of a Rajput ex-Subadar-Major of our Native Army. The girl had a
strain of Hill blood in her, and, like the Hill women, was not a purdah
nashin. Where Phil met her, or how he heard of her, does not matter. She
was a good girl and handsome, and, in her way, very clever and shrewd;
though, of course, a little hard. It is to be remembered that Phil was
living very comfortably, denying himself no small luxury, never putting
by an anna, very satisfied with himself and his good intentions, was
dropping all his English correspondents one by one, and beginning more
and more to look upon this land as his home. Some men fall this way; and
they are of no use afterwards. The climate where he was stationed was
good, and it really did not seem to him that there was anything to go
Home for.

He did what many planters have done before him--that is to say, he
made up his mind to marry a Hill girl and settle down. He was seven and
twenty then, with a long life before him, but no spirit to go through
with it. So he married Dunmaya by the forms of the English Church, and
some fellow-planters said he was a fool, and some said he was a
wise man. Dunmaya was a thoroughly honest girl, and, in spite of her
reverence for an Englishman, had a reasonable estimate of her husband's
weaknesses. She managed him tenderly, and became, in less than a year, a
very passable imitation of an English lady in dress and carriage. [It
is curious to think that a Hill man, after a lifetime's education, is
a Hill man still; but a Hill woman can in six months master most of the
ways of her English sisters. There was a coolie woman once. But that is
another story.] Dunmaya dressed by preference in black and yellow, and
looked well.

Meantime the letter lay in Agnes's desk, and now and again she would
think of poor resolute hard-working Phil among the cobras and tigers of
Darjiling, toiling in the vain hope that she might come back to him. Her
husband was worth ten Phils, except that he had rheumatism of the
heart. Three years after he was married--and after he had tried Nice
and Algeria for his complaint--he went to Bombay, where he died, and set
Agnes free. Being a devout woman, she looked on his death and the
place of it, as a direct interposition of Providence, and when she had
recovered from the shock, she took out and reread Phil's letter with the
“etc., etc.,” and the big dashes, and the little dashes, and kissed it
several times. No one knew her in Bombay; she had her husband's income,
which was a large one, and Phil was close at hand. It was wrong and
improper, of course, but she decided, as heroines do in novels, to find
her old lover, to offer him her hand and her gold, and with him spend
the rest of her life in some spot far from unsympathetic souls. She sat
for two months, alone in Watson's Hotel, elaborating this decision, and
the picture was a pretty one. Then she set out in search of Phil Garron,
Assistant on a tea plantation with a more than usually unpronounceable
name.

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

She found him. She spent a month over it, for his plantation was not in
the Darjiling district at all, but nearer Kangra. Phil was very little
altered, and Dunmaya was very nice to her.

Now the particular sin and shame of the whole business is that Phil, who
really is not worth thinking of twice, was and is loved by Dunmaya,
and more than loved by Agnes, the whole of whose life he seems to have
spoilt.

Worst of all, Dunmaya is making a decent man of him; and he will be
ultimately saved from perdition through her training.

Which is manifestly unfair.




FALSE DAWN.


     To-night God knows what thing shall tide,
       The Earth is racked and faint--
     Expectant, sleepless, open-eyed;
     And we, who from the Earth were made,
       Thrill with our Mother's pain.

                                In Durance.


No man will ever know the exact truth of this story; though women may
sometimes whisper it to one another after a dance, when they are putting
up their hair for the night and comparing lists of victims. A man, of
course, cannot assist at these functions. So the tale must be told from
the outside--in the dark--all wrong.

Never praise a sister to a sister, in the hope of your compliments
reaching the proper ears, and so preparing the way for you later on.
Sisters are women first, and sisters afterwards; and you will find that
you do yourself harm.

Saumarez knew this when he made up his mind to propose to the elder Miss
Copleigh. Saumarez was a strange man, with few merits, so far as men
could see, though he was popular with women, and carried enough
conceit to stock a Viceroy's Council and leave a little over for the
Commander-in-Chief's Staff. He was a Civilian. Very many women took an
interest in Saumarez, perhaps, because his manner to them was offensive.
If you hit a pony over the nose at the outset of your acquaintance, he
may not love you, but he will take a deep interest in your movements
ever afterwards. The elder Miss Copleigh was nice, plump, winning and
pretty. The younger was not so pretty, and, from men disregarding the
hint set forth above, her style was repellant and unattractive. Both
girls had, practically, the same figure, and there was a strong likeness
between them in look and voice; though no one could doubt for an instant
which was the nicer of the two.

Saumarez made up his mind, as soon as they came into the station from
Behar, to marry the elder one. At least, we all made sure that he
would, which comes to the same thing. She was two and twenty, and he was
thirty-three, with pay and allowances of nearly fourteen hundred rupees
a month. So the match, as we arranged it, was in every way a good one.
Saumarez was his name, and summary was his nature, as a man once said.
Having drafted his Resolution, he formed a Select Committee of One to
sit upon it, and resolved to take his time. In our unpleasant slang, the
Copleigh girls “hunted in couples.” That is to say, you could do nothing
with one without the other. They were very loving sisters; but
their mutual affection was sometimes inconvenient. Saumarez held the
balance-hair true between them, and none but himself could have said to
which side his heart inclined; though every one guessed. He rode
with them a good deal and danced with them, but he never succeeded in
detaching them from each other for any length of time.

Women said that the two girls kept together through deep mistrust, each
fearing that the other would steal a march on her. But that has
nothing to do with a man. Saumarez was silent for good or bad, and as
business-likely attentive as he could be, having due regard to his work
and his polo. Beyond doubt both girls were fond of him.

As the hot weather drew nearer, and Saumarez made no sign, women said
that you could see their trouble in the eyes of the girls--that they
were looking strained, anxious, and irritable. Men are quite blind in
these matters unless they have more of the woman than the man in their
composition, in which case it does not matter what they say or think.
I maintain it was the hot April days that took the color out of the
Copleigh girls' cheeks. They should have been sent to the Hills
early. No one--man or woman--feels an angel when the hot weather is
approaching. The younger sister grew more cynical--not to say acid--in
her ways; and the winningness of the elder wore thin. There was more
effort in it.

Now the Station wherein all these things happened was, though not
a little one, off the line of rail, and suffered through want of
attention. There were no gardens or bands or amusements worth speaking
of, and it was nearly a day's journey to come into Lahore for a dance.
People were grateful for small things to interest them.

About the beginning of May, and just before the final exodus of
Hill-goers, when the weather was very hot and there were not more than
twenty people in the Station, Saumarez gave a moonlight riding-picnic at
an old tomb, six miles away, near the bed of the river. It was a “Noah's
Ark” picnic; and there was to be the usual arrangement of quarter-mile
intervals between each couple, on account of the dust. Six couples came
altogether, including chaperons. Moonlight picnics are useful just at
the very end of the season, before all the girls go away to the Hills.
They lead to understandings, and should be encouraged by chaperones;
especially those whose girls look sweetish in riding habits. I knew a
case once. But that is another story. That picnic was called the “Great
Pop Picnic,” because every one knew Saumarez would propose then to the
eldest Miss Copleigh; and, beside his affair, there was another which
might possibly come to happiness. The social atmosphere was heavily
charged and wanted clearing.

We met at the parade-ground at ten: the night was fearfully hot. The
horses sweated even at walking-pace, but anything was better than
sitting still in our own dark houses. When we moved off under the full
moon we were four couples, one triplet, and Mr. Saumarez rode with the
Copleigh girls, and I loitered at the tail of the procession, wondering
with whom Saumarez would ride home. Every one was happy and contented;
but we all felt that things were going to happen. We rode slowly: and
it was nearly midnight before we reached the old tomb, facing the ruined
tank, in the decayed gardens where we were going to eat and drink. I
was late in coming up; and before I went into the garden, I saw that the
horizon to the north carried a faint, dun-colored feather. But no one
would have thanked me for spoiling so well-managed an entertainment as
this picnic--and a dust-storm, more or less, does no great harm.

We gathered by the tank. Some one had brought out a banjo--which is a
most sentimental instrument--and three or four of us sang. You must not
laugh at this. Our amusements in out-of-the-way Stations are very few
indeed. Then we talked in groups or together, lying under the trees,
with the sun-baked roses dropping their petals on our feet, until supper
was ready. It was a beautiful supper, as cold and as iced as you could
wish; and we stayed long over it.

I had felt that the air was growing hotter and hotter; but nobody
seemed to notice it until the moon went out and a burning hot wind began
lashing the orange-trees with a sound like the noise of the sea. Before
we knew where we were, the dust-storm was on us, and everything was
roaring, whirling darkness. The supper-table was blown bodily into the
tank. We were afraid of staying anywhere near the old tomb for fear it
might be blown down. So we felt our way to the orange-trees where the
horses were picketed and waited for the storm to blow over. Then the
little light that was left vanished, and you could not see your hand
before your face. The air was heavy with dust and sand from the bed
of the river, that filled boots and pockets and drifted down necks and
coated eyebrows and moustaches. It was one of the worst dust-storms of
the year. We were all huddled together close to the trembling horses,
with the thunder clattering overhead, and the lightning spurting like
water from a sluice, all ways at once. There was no danger, of course,
unless the horses broke loose. I was standing with my head downward and
my hands over my mouth, hearing the trees thrashing each other. I could
not see who was next me till the flashes came. Then I found that I was
packed near Saumarez and the eldest Miss Copleigh, with my own horse
just in front of me. I recognized the eldest Miss Copleigh, because
she had a pagri round her helmet, and the younger had not. All the
electricity in the air had gone into my body and I was quivering and
tingling from head to foot--exactly as a corn shoots and tingles before
rain. It was a grand storm. The wind seemed to be picking up the earth
and pitching it to leeward in great heaps; and the heat beat up from the
ground like the heat of the Day of Judgment.

The storm lulled slightly after the first half-hour, and I heard a
despairing little voice close to my ear, saying to itself, quietly and
softly, as if some lost soul were flying about with the wind: “O my
God!” Then the younger Miss Copleigh stumbled into my arms, saying:
“Where is my horse? Get my horse. I want to go home. I WANT to go home.
Take me home.”

I thought that the lightning and the black darkness had frightened her;
so I said there was no danger, but she must wait till the storm blew
over. She answered: “It is not THAT! It is not THAT! I want to go home!
O take me away from here!”

I said that she could not go till the light came; but I felt her brush
past me and go away. It was too dark to see where. Then the whole sky
was split open with one tremendous flash, as if the end of the world
were coming, and all the women shrieked.

Almost directly after this, I felt a man's hand on my shoulder and heard
Saumarez bellowing in my ear. Through the rattling of the trees and
howling of the wind, I did not catch his words at once, but at last
I heard him say: “I've proposed to the wrong one! What shall I do?”
 Saumarez had no occasion to make this confidence to me. I was never a
friend of his, nor am I now; but I fancy neither of us were ourselves
just then. He was shaking as he stood with excitement, and I was feeling
queer all over with the electricity. I could not think of anything to
say except:--“More fool you for proposing in a dust-storm.” But I did
not see how that would improve the mistake.

Then he shouted: “Where's Edith--Edith Copleigh?” Edith was the youngest
sister. I answered out of my astonishment:--“What do you want with HER?”
 Would you believe it, for the next two minutes, he and I were shouting
at each other like maniacs--he vowing that it was the youngest sister he
had meant to propose to all along, and I telling him till my throat
was hoarse that he must have made a mistake! I can't account for
this except, again, by the fact that we were neither of us ourselves.
Everything seemed to me like a bad dream--from the stamping of the
horses in the darkness to Saumarez telling me the story of his loving
Edith Copleigh since the first. He was still clawing my shoulder and
begging me to tell him where Edith Copleigh was, when another lull came
and brought light with it, and we saw the dust-cloud forming on the
plain in front of us. So we knew the worst was over. The moon was low
down, and there was just the glimmer of the false dawn that comes about
an hour before the real one. But the light was very faint, and the dun
cloud roared like a bull. I wondered where Edith Copleigh had gone; and
as I was wondering I saw three things together: First Maud Copleigh's
face come smiling out of the darkness and move towards Saumarez, who was
standing by me. I heard the girl whisper, “George,” and slide her arm
through the arm that was not clawing my shoulder, and I saw that look
on her face which only comes once or twice in a lifetime-when a woman
is perfectly happy and the air is full of trumpets and gorgeous-colored
fire and the Earth turns into cloud because she loves and is loved. At
the same time, I saw Saumarez's face as he heard Maud Copleigh's voice,
and fifty yards away from the clump of orange-trees I saw a brown
holland habit getting upon a horse.

It must have been my state of over-excitement that made me so quick
to meddle with what did not concern me. Saumarez was moving off to the
habit; but I pushed him back and said:--“Stop here and explain. I'll
fetch her back!” and I ran out to get at my own horse. I had a perfectly
unnecessary notion that everything must be done decently and in order,
and that Saumarez's first care was to wipe the happy look out of Maud
Copleigh's face. All the time I was linking up the curb-chain I wondered
how he would do it.

I cantered after Edith Copleigh, thinking to bring her back slowly on
some pretence or another. But she galloped away as soon as she saw me,
and I was forced to ride after her in earnest. She called back over her
shoulder--“Go away! I'm going home. Oh, go away!” two or three times;
but my business was to catch her first, and argue later. The ride just
fitted in with the rest of the evil dream. The ground was very bad, and
now and again we rushed through the whirling, choking “dust-devils” in
the skirts of the flying storm. There was a burning hot wind blowing
that brought up a stench of stale brick-kilns with it; and through the
half light and through the dust-devils, across that desolate plain,
flickered the brown holland habit on the gray horse. She headed for
the Station at first. Then she wheeled round and set off for the river
through beds of burnt down jungle-grass, bad even to ride a pig over. In
cold blood I should never have dreamed of going over such a country
at night, but it seemed quite right and natural with the lightning
crackling overhead, and a reek like the smell of the Pit in my nostrils.
I rode and shouted, and she bent forward and lashed her horse, and the
aftermath of the dust-storm came up and caught us both, and drove us
downwind like pieces of paper.

I don't know how far we rode; but the drumming of the horse-hoofs and
the roar of the wind and the race of the faint blood-red moon through
the yellow mist seemed to have gone on for years and years, and I was
literally drenched with sweat from my helmet to my gaiters when the gray
stumbled, recovered himself, and pulled up dead lame. My brute was used
up altogether. Edith Copleigh was in a sad state, plastered with dust,
her helmet off, and crying bitterly. “Why can't you let me alone?” she
said. “I only wanted to get away and go home. Oh, PLEASE let me go!”

“You have got to come back with me, Miss Copleigh. Saumarez has
something to say to you.”

It was a foolish way of putting it; but I hardly knew Miss Copleigh;
and, though I was playing Providence at the cost of my horse, I could
not tell her in as many words what Saumarez had told me. I thought he
could do that better himself. All her pretence about being tired and
wanting to go home broke down, and she rocked herself to and fro in the
saddle as she sobbed, and the hot wind blew her black hair to leeward. I
am not going to repeat what she said, because she was utterly unstrung.

This, if you please, was the cynical Miss Copleigh. Here was I, almost
an utter stranger to her, trying to tell her that Saumarez loved her
and she was to come back to hear him say so! I believe I made myself
understood, for she gathered the gray together and made him hobble
somehow, and we set off for the tomb, while the storm went thundering
down to Umballa and a few big drops of warm rain fell. I found out that
she had been standing close to Saumarez when he proposed to her sister
and had wanted to go home and cry in peace, as an English girl should.
She dabbled her eyes with her pocket-handkerchief as we went along, and
babbled to me out of sheer lightness of heart and hysteria. That was
perfectly unnatural; and yet, it seemed all right at the time and in the
place. All the world was only the two Copleigh girls, Saumarez and I,
ringed in with the lightning and the dark; and the guidance of this
misguided world seemed to lie in my hands.

When we returned to the tomb in the deep, dead stillness that followed
the storm, the dawn was just breaking and nobody had gone away. They
were waiting for our return. Saumarez most of all. His face was white
and drawn. As Miss Copleigh and I limped up, he came forward to meet us,
and, when he helped her down from her saddle, he kissed her before
all the picnic. It was like a scene in a theatre, and the likeness was
heightened by all the dust-white, ghostly-looking men and women under
the orange-trees, clapping their hands, as if they were watching a
play--at Saumarez's choice. I never knew anything so un-English in my
life.

Lastly, Saumarez said we must all go home or the Station would come
out to look for us, and WOULD I be good enough to ride home with Maud
Copleigh? Nothing would give me greater pleasure, I said.

So, we formed up, six couples in all, and went back two by two; Saumarez
walking at the side of Edith Copleigh, who was riding his horse.

The air was cleared; and little by little, as the sun rose, I felt we
were all dropping back again into ordinary men and women and that
the “Great Pop Picnic” was a thing altogether apart and out of the
world--never to happen again. It had gone with the dust-storm and the
tingle in the hot air.

I felt tired and limp, and a good deal ashamed of myself as I went in
for a bath and some sleep.

There is a woman's version of this story, but it will never be
written.... unless Maud Copleigh cares to try.




THE RESCUE OF PLUFFLES.


     Thus, for a season, they fought it fair--
       She and his cousin May--
     Tactful, talented, debonnaire,
       Decorous foes were they;
     But never can battle of man compare
       With merciless feminine fray.

                            Two and One.


Mrs. Hauksbee was sometimes nice to her own sex. Here is a story to
prove this; and you can believe just as much as ever you please.

Pluffles was a subaltern in the “Unmentionables.” He was callow, even
for a subaltern. He was callow all over--like a canary that had not
finished fledging itself. The worst of it was he had three times as much
money as was good for him; Pluffles' Papa being a rich man and Pluffles
being the only son. Pluffles' Mamma adored him. She was only a little
less callow than Pluffles and she believed everything he said.

Pluffles' weakness was not believing what people said. He preferred what
he called “trusting to his own judgment.” He had as much judgment as he
had seat or hands; and this preference tumbled him into trouble once or
twice. But the biggest trouble Pluffles ever manufactured came about at
Simla--some years ago, when he was four-and-twenty.

He began by trusting to his own judgment, as usual, and the result
was that, after a time, he was bound hand and foot to Mrs. Reiver's
'rickshaw wheels.

There was nothing good about Mrs. Reiver, unless it was her dress.
She was bad from her hair--which started life on a Brittany's girl's
head--to her boot-heels, which were two and three-eighth inches high.
She was not honestly mischievous like Mrs. Hauksbee; she was wicked in a
business-like way.

There was never any scandal--she had not generous impulses enough for
that. She was the exception which proved the rule that Anglo-Indian
ladies are in every way as nice as their sisters at Home. She spent her
life in proving that rule.

Mrs. Hauksbee and she hated each other fervently. They heard far
too much to clash; but the things they said of each other were
startling--not to say original. Mrs. Hauksbee was honest--honest as her
own front teeth--and, but for her love of mischief, would have been
a woman's woman. There was no honesty about Mrs. Reiver; nothing but
selfishness. And at the beginning of the season, poor little Pluffles
fell a prey to her. She laid herself out to that end, and who was
Pluffles, to resist? He went on trusting to his judgment, and he got
judged.

I have seen Hayes argue with a tough horse--I have seen a tonga-driver
coerce a stubborn pony--I have seen a riotous setter broken to gun by a
hard keeper--but the breaking-in of Pluffles of the “Unmentionables” was
beyond all these. He learned to fetch and carry like a dog, and to
wait like one, too, for a word from Mrs. Reiver. He learned to keep
appointments which Mrs. Reiver had no intention of keeping. He learned
to take thankfully dances which Mrs. Reiver had no intention of giving
him. He learned to shiver for an hour and a quarter on the windward side
of Elysium while Mrs. Reiver was making up her mind to come for a
ride. He learned to hunt for a 'rickshaw, in a light dress-suit under
a pelting rain, and to walk by the side of that 'rickshaw when he had
found it. He learned what it was to be spoken to like a coolie and
ordered about like a cook. He learned all this and many other things
besides. And he paid for his schooling.

Perhaps, in some hazy way, he fancied that it was fine and impressive,
that it gave him a status among men, and was altogether the thing to do.
It was nobody's business to warn Pluffles that he was unwise. The pace
that season was too good to inquire; and meddling with another man's
folly is always thankless work. Pluffles' Colonel should have ordered
him back to his regiment when he heard how things were going. But
Pluffles had got himself engaged to a girl in England the last time
he went home; and if there was one thing more than another which the
Colonel detested, it was a married subaltern. He chuckled when he heard
of the education of Pluffles, and said it was “good training for
the boy.” But it was not good training in the least. It led him into
spending money beyond his means, which were good: above that, the
education spoilt an average boy and made it a tenth-rate man of an
objectionable kind. He wandered into a bad set, and his little bill at
Hamilton's was a thing to wonder at.

Then Mrs. Hauksbee rose to the occasion. She played her game alone,
knowing what people would say of her; and she played it for the sake of
a girl she had never seen. Pluffles' fiancee was to come out, under the
chaperonage of an aunt, in October, to be married to Pluffles.

At the beginning of August, Mrs. Hauksbee discovered that it was time to
interfere. A man who rides much knows exactly what a horse is going to
do next before he does it. In the same way, a woman of Mrs. Hauksbee's
experience knows accurately how a boy will behave under certain
circumstances--notably when he is infatuated with one of Mrs. Reiver's
stamp. She said that, sooner or later, little Pluffles would break off
that engagement for nothing at all--simply to gratify Mrs. Reiver, who,
in return, would keep him at her feet and in her service just so long
as she found it worth her while. She said she knew the signs of these
things. If she did not, no one else could.

Then she went forth to capture Pluffles under the guns of the enemy;
just as Mrs. Cusack-Bremmil carried away Bremmil under Mrs. Hauksbee's
eyes.

This particular engagement lasted seven weeks--we called it the Seven
Weeks' War--and was fought out inch by inch on both sides. A detailed
account would fill a book, and would be incomplete then. Any one who
knows about these things can fit in the details for himself. It was
a superb fight--there will never be another like it as long as Jakko
stands--and Pluffles was the prize of victory. People said shameful
things about Mrs. Hauksbee. They did not know what she was playing
for. Mrs. Reiver fought, partly because Pluffles was useful to her, but
mainly because she hated Mrs. Hauksbee, and the matter was a trial of
strength between them. No one knows what Pluffles thought. He had not
many ideas at the best of times, and the few he possessed made him
conceited. Mrs. Hauksbee said:--“The boy must be caught; and the only
way of catching him is by treating him well.”

So she treated him as a man of the world and of experience so long as
the issue was doubtful. Little by little, Pluffles fell away from his
old allegiance and came over to the enemy, by whom he was made much of.
He was never sent on out-post duty after 'rickshaws any more, nor was
he given dances which never came off, nor were the drains on his
purse continued. Mrs. Hauksbee held him on the snaffle; and after his
treatment at Mrs. Reiver's hands, he appreciated the change.

Mrs. Reiver had broken him of talking about himself, and made him
talk about her own merits. Mrs. Hauksbee acted otherwise, and won
his confidence, till he mentioned his engagement to the girl at Home,
speaking of it in a high and mighty way as a “piece of boyish folly.”
 This was when he was taking tea with her one afternoon, and discoursing
in what he considered a gay and fascinating style. Mrs. Hauksbee had
seen an earlier generation of his stamp bud and blossom, and decay into
fat Captains and tubby Majors.

At a moderate estimate there were about three and twenty sides to that
lady's character. Some men say more. She began to talk to Pluffles after
the manner of a mother, and as if there had been three hundred years,
instead of fifteen, between them. She spoke with a sort of throaty
quaver in her voice which had a soothing effect, though what she said
was anything but soothing. She pointed out the exceeding folly, not to
say meanness, of Pluffles' conduct, and the smallness of his views. Then
he stammered something about “trusting to his own judgment as a man of
the world;” and this paved the way for what she wanted to say next. It
would have withered up Pluffles had it come from any other woman; but
in the soft cooing style in which Mrs. Hauksbee put it, it only made
him feel limp and repentant--as if he had been in some superior kind of
church. Little by little, very softly and pleasantly, she began taking
the conceit out of Pluffles, as you take the ribs out of an umbrella
before re-covering it. She told him what she thought of him and his
judgment and his knowledge of the world; and how his performances had
made him ridiculous to other people; and how it was his intention to make
love to herself if she gave him the chance. Then she said that marriage
would be the making of him; and drew a pretty little picture--all rose
and opal--of the Mrs. Pluffles of the future going through life relying
on the “judgment” and “knowledge of the world” of a husband who
had nothing to reproach himself with. How she reconciled these
two statements she alone knew. But they did not strike Pluffles as
conflicting.

Hers was a perfect little homily--much better than any clergyman could
have given--and it ended with touching allusions to Pluffles' Mamma and
Papa, and the wisdom of taking his bride Home.

Then she sent Pluffles out for a walk, to think over what she had said.
Pluffles left, blowing his nose very hard and holding himself very
straight. Mrs. Hauksbee laughed.

What Pluffles had intended to do in the matter of the engagement only
Mrs. Reiver knew, and she kept her own counsel to her death. She would
have liked it spoiled as a compliment, I fancy.

Pluffles enjoyed many talks with Mrs. Hauksbee during the next few days.
They were all to the same end, and they helped Pluffles in the path of
Virtue.

Mrs. Hauksbee wanted to keep him under her wing to the last. Therefore
she discountenanced his going down to Bombay to get married. “Goodness
only knows what might happen by the way!” she said. “Pluffles is cursed
with the curse of Reuben, and India is no fit place for him!”

In the end, the fiancee arrived with her aunt; and Pluffles, having
reduced his affairs to some sort of order--here again Mrs. Hauksbee
helped him--was married.

Mrs. Hauksbee gave a sigh of relief when both the “I wills” had been
said, and went her way.

Pluffies took her advice about going Home. He left the Service, and is
now raising speckled cattle inside green painted fences somewhere at
Home. I believe he does this very judiciously. He would have come to
extreme grief out here.

For these reasons if any one says anything more than usually nasty about
Mrs. Hauksbee, tell him the story of the Rescue of Pluffles.




CUPID'S ARROWS.


     Pit where the buffalo cooled his hide,
     By the hot sun emptied, and blistered and dried;
     Log in the reh-grass, hidden and alone;
     Bund where the earth-rat's mounds are strown:
     Cave in the bank where the sly stream steals;
     Aloe that stabs at the belly and heels,
     Jump if you dare on a steed untried--
     Safer it is to go wide--go wide!
     Hark, from in front where the best men ride:--
     “Pull to the off, boys!  Wide!  Go wide!”

                                 The Peora Hunt.



Once upon a time there lived at Simla a very pretty girl, the daughter
of a poor but honest District and Sessions Judge. She was a good girl,
but could not help knowing her power and using it. Her Mamma was very
anxious about her daughter's future, as all good Mammas should be.

When a man is a Commissioner and a bachelor and has the right of wearing
open-work jam-tart jewels in gold and enamel on his clothes, and of
going through a door before every one except a Member of Council, a
Lieutenant-Governor, or a Viceroy, he is worth marrying. At least, that
is what ladies say. There was a Commissioner in Simla, in those days,
who was, and wore, and did, all I have said. He was a plain man--an ugly
man--the ugliest man in Asia, with two exceptions. His was a face to
dream about and try to carve on a pipe-head afterwards. His name was
Saggott--Barr-Saggott--Anthony Barr-Saggott and six letters to follow.
Departmentally, he was one of the best men the Government of India
owned. Socially, he was like a blandishing gorilla.

When he turned his attentions to Miss Beighton, I believe that Mrs.
Beighton wept with delight at the reward Providence had sent her in her
old age.

Mr. Beighton held his tongue. He was an easy-going man.

Now a Commissioner is very rich. His pay is beyond the dreams of
avarice--is so enormous that he can afford to save and scrape in a way
that would almost discredit a Member of Council. Most Commissioners
are mean; but Barr-Saggott was an exception. He entertained royally; he
horsed himself well; he gave dances; he was a power in the land; and he
behaved as such.

Consider that everything I am writing of took place in an almost
pre-historic era in the history of British India. Some folk may remember
the years before lawn-tennis was born when we all played croquet. There
were seasons before that, if you will believe me, when even croquet
had not been invented, and archery--which was revived in England in
1844--was as great a pest as lawn-tennis is now. People talked learnedly
about “holding” and “loosing,” “steles,” “reflexed bows,” “56-pound
bows,” “backed” or “self-yew bows,” as we talk about “rallies,”
 “volleys,” “smashes,” “returns,” and “16-ounce rackets.”

Miss Beighton shot divinely over ladies' distance--60 yards, that
is--and was acknowledged the best lady archer in Simla. Men called her
“Diana of Tara-Devi.”

Barr-Saggott paid her great attention; and, as I have said, the heart of
her mother was uplifted in consequence. Kitty Beighton took matters more
calmly. It was pleasant to be singled out by a Commissioner with letters
after his name, and to fill the hearts of other girls with bad feelings.
But there was no denying the fact that Barr-Saggott was phenomenally
ugly; and all his attempts to adorn himself only made him more
grotesque. He was not christened “The Langur”--which means gray ape--for
nothing. It was pleasant, Kitty thought, to have him at her feet, but
it was better to escape from him and ride with the graceless Cubbon--the
man in a Dragoon Regiment at Umballa--the boy with a handsome face, and
no prospects. Kitty liked Cubbon more than a little. He never pretended
for a moment the he was anything less than head over heels in love with
her; for he was an honest boy. So Kitty fled, now and again, from the
stately wooings of Barr-Saggott to the company of young Cubbon, and
was scolded by her Mamma in consequence. “But, Mother,” she said, “Mr.
Saggot is such--such a--is so FEARFULLY ugly, you know!”

“My dear,” said Mrs. Beighton, piously, “we cannot be other than an
all-ruling Providence has made us. Besides, you will take precedence of
your own Mother, you know! Think of that and be reasonable.”

Then Kitty put up her little chin and said irreverent things about
precedence, and Commissioners, and matrimony. Mr. Beighton rubbed the
top of his head; for he was an easy-going man.

Late in the season, when he judged that the time was ripe, Barr-Saggott
developed a plan which did great credit to his administrative powers.
He arranged an archery tournament for ladies, with a most sumptuous
diamond-studded bracelet as prize. He drew up his terms skilfully,
and every one saw that the bracelet was a gift to Miss Beighton; the
acceptance carrying with it the hand and the heart of Commissioner
Barr-Saggott. The terms were a St. Leonard's Round--thirty-six shots at
sixty yards--under the rules of the Simla Toxophilite Society.

All Simla was invited. There were beautifully arranged tea-tables under
the deodars at Annandale, where the Grand Stand is now; and, alone in
its glory, winking in the sun, sat the diamond bracelet in a blue velvet
case. Miss Beighton was anxious--almost too anxious to compete. On the
appointed afternoon, all Simla rode down to Annandale to witness the
Judgment of Paris turned upside down. Kitty rode with young Cubbon, and
it was easy to see that the boy was troubled in his mind. He must be
held innocent of everything that followed. Kitty was pale and nervous,
and looked long at the bracelet. Barr-Saggott was gorgeously dressed,
even more nervous than Kitty, and more hideous than ever.

Mrs. Beighton smiled condescendingly, as befitted the mother of a
potential Commissioneress, and the shooting began; all the world
standing in a semicircle as the ladies came out one after the other.

Nothing is so tedious as an archery competition. They shot, and they
shot, and they kept on shooting, till the sun left the valley, and
little breezes got up in the deodars, and people waited for Miss
Beighton to shoot and win. Cubbon was at one horn of the semicircle
round the shooters, and Barr-Saggott at the other. Miss Beighton was
last on the list. The scoring had been weak, and the bracelet, PLUS
Commissioner Barr-Saggott, was hers to a certainty.

The Commissioner strung her bow with his own sacred hands. She stepped
forward, looked at the bracelet, and her first arrow went true to a
hair--full into the heart of the “gold”--counting nine points.

Young Cubbon on the left turned white, and his Devil prompted
Barr-Saggott to smile. Now horses used to shy when Barr-Saggott smiled.
Kitty saw that smile. She looked to her left-front, gave an almost
imperceptible nod to Cubbon, and went on shooting.

I wish I could describe the scene that followed. It was out of the
ordinary and most improper. Miss Kitty fitted her arrows with immense
deliberation, so that every one might see what she was doing. She was
a perfect shot; and her 46-pound bow suited her to a nicety. She pinned
the wooden legs of the target with great care four successive times. She
pinned the wooden top of the target once, and all the ladies looked at
each other. Then she began some fancy shooting at the white, which,
if you hit it, counts exactly one point. She put five arrows into the
white. It was wonderful archery; but, seeing that her business was to
make “golds” and win the bracelet, Barr-Saggott turned a delicate green
like young water-grass. Next, she shot over the target twice, then wide
to the left twice--always with the same deliberation--while a chilly
hush fell over the company, and Mrs. Beighton took out her handkerchief.
Then Kitty shot at the ground in front of the target, and split several
arrows. Then she made a red--or seven points--just to show what she
could do if she liked, and finished up her amazing performance with some
more fancy shooting at the target-supports. Here is her score as it was
picked off:--

               Gold.  Red.  Blue.  Black.  White.  Total Hits.   Total
 Score
 Miss Beighton   1     1      0      0       5          7          21


Barr-Saggott looked as if the last few arrowheads had been driven into
his legs instead of the target's, and the deep stillness was broken by
a little snubby, mottled, half-grown girl saying in a shrill voice of
triumph: “Then I'VE won!”

Mrs. Beighton did her best to bear up; but she wept in the presence of
the people. No training could help her through such a disappointment.
Kitty unstrung her bow with a vicious jerk, and went back to her place,
while Barr-Saggott was trying to pretend that he enjoyed snapping
the bracelet on the snubby girl's raw, red wrist. It was an awkward
scene--most awkward. Every one tried to depart in a body and leave Kitty
to the mercy of her Mamma.

But Cubbon took her away instead, and--the rest isn't worth printing.




HIS CHANCE IN LIFE.


     Then a pile of heads be laid--
       Thirty thousand heaped on high--
     All to please the Kafir maid,
       Where the Oxus ripples by.
         Grimly spake Atulla Khan:--
       “Love hath made this thing a Man.”

                          Oatta's Story.


If you go straight away from Levees and Government House Lists, past
Trades' Balls--far beyond everything and everybody you ever knew in your
respectable life--you cross, in time, the Border line where the last
drop of White blood ends and the full tide of Black sets in. It would be
easier to talk to a new made Duchess on the spur of the moment than
to the Borderline folk without violating some of their conventions or
hurting their feelings. The Black and the White mix very quaintly in
their ways. Sometimes the White shows in spurts of fierce, childish
pride--which is Pride of Race run crooked--and sometimes the Black
in still fiercer abasement and humility, half heathenish customs and
strange, unaccountable impulses to crime. One of these days, this
people--understand they are far lower than the class whence Derozio, the
man who imitated Byron, sprung--will turn out a writer or a poet; and
then we shall know how they live and what they feel. In the meantime,
any stories about them cannot be absolutely correct in fact or
inference.

Miss Vezzis came from across the Borderline to look after some children
who belonged to a lady until a regularly ordained nurse could come out.
The lady said Miss Vezzis was a bad, dirty nurse and inattentive. It
never struck her that Miss Vezzis had her own life to lead and her own
affairs to worry over, and that these affairs were the most important
things in the world to Miss Vezzis. Very few mistresses admit this sort
of reasoning. Miss Vezzis was as black as a boot, and to our standard of
taste, hideously ugly. She wore cotton-print gowns and bulged shoes;
and when she lost her temper with the children, she abused them in the
language of the Borderline--which is part English, part Portuguese,
and part Native. She was not attractive; but she had her pride, and she
preferred being called “Miss Vezzis.”

Every Sunday she dressed herself wonderfully and went to see her
Mamma, who lived, for the most part, on an old cane chair in a greasy
tussur-silk dressing-gown and a big rabbit-warren of a house full of
Vezzises, Pereiras, Ribieras, Lisboas and Gansalveses, and a floating
population of loafers; besides fragments of the day's bazar, garlic,
stale incense, clothes thrown on the floor, petticoats hung on strings
for screens, old bottles, pewter crucifixes, dried immortelles, pariah
puppies, plaster images of the Virgin, and hats without crowns. Miss
Vezzis drew twenty rupees a month for acting as nurse, and she
squabbled weekly with her Mamma as to the percentage to be given towards
housekeeping. When the quarrel was over, Michele D'Cruze used to shamble
across the low mud wall of the compound and make love to Miss Vezzis
after the fashion of the Borderline, which is hedged about with much
ceremony. Michele was a poor, sickly weed and very black; but he had his
pride. He would not be seen smoking a huqa for anything; and he looked
down on natives as only a man with seven-eighths native blood in his
veins can. The Vezzis Family had their pride too. They traced their
descent from a mythical plate-layer who had worked on the Sone Bridge
when railways were new in India, and they valued their English origin.
Michele was a Telegraph Signaller on Rs. 35 a month. The fact that he
was in Government employ made Mrs. Vezzis lenient to the shortcomings of
his ancestors.

There was a compromising legend--Dom Anna the tailor brought it from
Poonani--that a black Jew of Cochin had once married into the D'Cruze
family; while it was an open secret that an uncle of Mrs. D'Cruze was at
that very time doing menial work, connected with cooking, for a Club in
Southern India! He sent Mrs D'Cruze seven rupees eight annas a month;
but she felt the disgrace to the family very keenly all the same.

However, in the course of a few Sundays, Mrs. Vezzis brought herself
to overlook these blemishes and gave her consent to the marriage of her
daughter with Michele, on condition that Michele should have at least
fifty rupees a month to start married life upon. This wonderful prudence
must have been a lingering touch of the mythical plate-layer's Yorkshire
blood; for across the Borderline people take a pride in marrying when
they please--not when they can.

Having regard to his departmental prospects, Miss Vezzis might as well
have asked Michele to go away and come back with the Moon in his pocket.
But Michele was deeply in love with Miss Vezzis, and that helped him to
endure. He accompanied Miss Vezzis to Mass one Sunday, and after Mass,
walking home through the hot stale dust with her hand in his, he swore
by several Saints, whose names would not interest you, never to forget
Miss Vezzis; and she swore by her Honor and the Saints--the oath runs
rather curiously; “In nomine Sanctissimae--” (whatever the name of the
she-Saint is) and so forth, ending with a kiss on the forehead, a kiss
on the left cheek, and a kiss on the mouth--never to forget Michele.

Next week Michele was transferred, and Miss Vezzis dropped tears
upon the window-sash of the “Intermediate” compartment as he left the
Station.

If you look at the telegraph-map of India you will see a long line
skirting the coast from Backergunge to Madras. Michele was ordered to
Tibasu, a little Sub-office one-third down this line, to send messages
on from Berhampur to Chicacola, and to think of Miss Vezzis and his
chances of getting fifty rupees a month out of office hours. He had the
noise of the Bay of Bengal and a Bengali Babu for company; nothing more.
He sent foolish letters, with crosses tucked inside the flaps of the
envelopes, to Miss Vezzis.

When he had been at Tibasu for nearly three weeks his chance came.

Never forget that unless the outward and visible signs of Our
Authority are always before a native he is as incapable as a child of
understanding what authority means, or where is the danger of disobeying
it. Tibasu was a forgotten little place with a few Orissa Mohamedans
in it. These, hearing nothing of the Collector-Sahib for some time,
and heartily despising the Hindu Sub-Judge, arranged to start a little
Mohurrum riot of their own. But the Hindus turned out and broke their
heads; when, finding lawlessness pleasant, Hindus and Mahomedans
together raised an aimless sort of Donnybrook just to see how far they
could go. They looted each other's shops, and paid off private grudges
in the regular way. It was a nasty little riot, but not worth putting in
the newspapers.

Michele was working in his office when he heard the sound that a man
never forgets all his life--the “ah-yah” of an angry crowd. [When that
sound drops about three tones, and changes to a thick, droning _ut_, the
man who hears it had better go away if he is alone.] The Native Police
Inspector ran in and told Michele that the town was in an uproar and
coming to wreck the Telegraph Office. The Babu put on his cap and
quietly dropped out of the window; while the Police Inspector, afraid,
but obeying the old race-instinct which recognizes a drop of White blood
as far as it can be diluted, said:--“What orders does the Sahib give?”

The “Sahib” decided Michele. Though horribly frightened, he felt that,
for the hour, he, the man with the Cochin Jew and the menial uncle in
his pedigree, was the only representative of English authority in the
place. Then he thought of Miss Vezzis and the fifty rupees, and took the
situation on himself. There were seven native policemen in Tibasu, and
four crazy smooth-bore muskets among them. All the men were gray with
fear, but not beyond leading. Michele dropped the key of the telegraph
instrument, and went out, at the head of his army, to meet the mob. As
the shouting crew came round a corner of the road, he dropped and fired;
the men behind him loosing instinctively at the same time.

The whole crowd--curs to the backbone--yelled and ran; leaving one man
dead, and another dying in the road. Michele was sweating with fear, but
he kept his weakness under, and went down into the town, past the house
where the Sub-Judge had barricaded himself. The streets were empty.
Tibasu was more frightened than Michele, for the mob had been taken at
the right time.

Michele returned to the Telegraph-Office, and sent a message to
Chicacola asking for help. Before an answer came, he received a
deputation of the elders of Tibasu, telling him that the Sub-Judge said
his actions generally were “unconstitutional,” and trying to bully him.
But the heart of Michele D'Cruze was big and white in his breast,
because of his love for Miss Vezzis, the nurse-girl, and because he had
tasted for the first time Responsibility and Success. Those two make
an intoxicating drink, and have ruined more men than ever has Whiskey.
Michele answered that the Sub-Judge might say what he pleased, but,
until the Assistant Collector came, the Telegraph Signaller was the
Government of India in Tibasu, and the elders of the town would be held
accountable for further rioting. Then they bowed their heads and said:
“Show mercy!” or words to that effect, and went back in great fear; each
accusing the other of having begun the rioting.

Early in the dawn, after a night's patrol with his seven policemen,
Michele went down the road, musket in hand, to meet the Assistant
Collector, who had ridden in to quell Tibasu. But, in the presence of
this young Englishman, Michele felt himself slipping back more and more
into the native, and the tale of the Tibasu Riots ended, with the strain
on the teller, in an hysterical outburst of tears, bred by sorrow that
he had killed a man, shame that he could not feel as uplifted as he had
felt through the night, and childish anger that his tongue could not
do justice to his great deeds. It was the White drop in Michele's veins
dying out, though he did not know it.

But the Englishman understood; and, after he had schooled those men
of Tibasu, and had conferred with the Sub-Judge till that excellent
official turned green, he found time to draught an official letter
describing the conduct of Michele. Which letter filtered through the
Proper Channels, and ended in the transfer of Michele up-country once
more, on the Imperial salary of sixty-six rupees a month.

So he and Miss Vezzis were married with great state and ancientry; and
now there are several little D'Cruzes sprawling about the verandahs of
the Central Telegraph Office.

But, if the whole revenue of the Department he serves were to be his
reward Michele could never, never repeat what he did at Tibasu for the
sake of Miss Vezzis the nurse-girl.

Which proves that, when a man does good work out of all proportion to
his pay, in seven cases out of nine there is a woman at the back of the
virtue.

The two exceptions must have suffered from sunstroke.




WATCHES OF THE NIGHT.


   What is in the Brahmin's books that is in the Brahmin's heart.
   Neither you nor I knew there was so much evil in the world.

                                                   Hindu Proverb.


This began in a practical joke; but it has gone far enough now, and is
getting serious.

Platte, the Subaltern, being poor, had a Waterbury watch and a plain
leather guard.

The Colonel had a Waterbury watch also, and for guard, the lip-strap of
a curb-chain. Lip-straps make the best watch guards. They are strong
and short. Between a lip-strap and an ordinary leather guard there is no
great difference; between one Waterbury watch and another there is none
at all. Every one in the station knew the Colonel's lip-strap. He was
not a horsey man, but he liked people to believe he had been on once;
and he wove fantastic stories of the hunting-bridle to which this
particular lip-strap had belonged. Otherwise he was painfully religious.

Platte and the Colonel were dressing at the Club--both late for their
engagements, and both in a hurry. That was Kismet. The two watches
were on a shelf below the looking-glass--guards hanging down. That was
carelessness. Platte changed first, snatched a watch, looked in the
glass, settled his tie, and ran. Forty seconds later, the Colonel did
exactly the same thing; each man taking the other's watch.

You may have noticed that many religious people are deeply suspicious.
They seem--for purely religious purposes, of course--to know more about
iniquity than the Unregenerate. Perhaps they were specially bad before
they became converted! At any rate, in the imputation of things evil,
and in putting the worst construction on things innocent, a certain type
of good people may be trusted to surpass all others. The Colonel and
his Wife were of that type. But the Colonel's Wife was the worst. She
manufactured the Station scandal, and--TALKED TO HER AYAH! Nothing
more need be said. The Colonel's Wife broke up the Laplace's home. The
Colonel's Wife stopped the Ferris-Haughtrey engagement. The Colonel's
Wife induced young Buxton to keep his wife down in the Plains through
the first year of the marriage. Whereby little Mrs. Buxton died, and
the baby with her. These things will be remembered against the Colonel's
Wife so long as there is a regiment in the country.

But to come back to the Colonel and Platte. They went their several
ways from the dressing-room. The Colonel dined with two Chaplains, while
Platte went to a bachelor-party, and whist to follow.

Mark how things happen! If Platte's sais had put the new saddle-pad on
the mare, the butts of the territs would not have worked through the
worn leather, and the old pad into the mare's withers, when she was
coming home at two o'clock in the morning. She would not have reared,
bolted, fallen into a ditch, upset the cart, and sent Platte flying over
an aloe-hedge on to Mrs. Larkyn's well-kept lawn; and this tale would
never have been written. But the mare did all these things, and while
Platte was rolling over and over on the turf, like a shot rabbit, the
watch and guard flew from his waistcoat--as an Infantry Major's sword
hops out of the scabbard when they are firing a feu de joie--and rolled
and rolled in the moonlight, till it stopped under a window.

Platte stuffed his handkerchief under the pad, put the cart straight,
and went home.

Mark again how Kismet works! This would not happen once in a hundred
years. Towards the end of his dinner with the two Chaplains, the Colonel
let out his waistcoat and leaned over the table to look at some Mission
Reports. The bar of the watch-guard worked through the buttonhole, and
the watch--Platte's watch--slid quietly on to the carpet. Where the
bearer found it next morning and kept it.

Then the Colonel went home to the wife of his bosom; but the driver of
the carriage was drunk and lost his way. So the Colonel returned at an
unseemly hour and his excuses were not accepted. If the Colonel's Wife
had been an ordinary “vessel of wrath appointed for destruction,” she
would have known that when a man stays away on purpose, his excuse
is always sound and original. The very baldness of the Colonel's
explanation proved its truth.

See once more the workings of Kismet! The Colonel's watch which came
with Platte hurriedly on to Mrs. Larkyn's lawn, chose to stop just under
Mrs. Larkyn's window, where she saw it early in the morning, recognized
it, and picked it up. She had heard the crash of Platte's cart at two
o'clock that morning, and his voice calling the mare names. She knew
Platte and liked him. That day she showed him the watch and heard his
story. He put his head on one side, winked and said:--“How disgusting!
Shocking old man! with his religious training, too! I should send the
watch to the Colonel's Wife and ask for explanations.”

Mrs. Larkyn thought for a minute of the Laplaces--whom she had known
when Laplace and his wife believed in each other--and answered:--“I will
send it. I think it will do her good. But remember, we must NEVER tell
her the truth.”

Platte guessed that his own watch was in the Colonel's possession, and
thought that the return of the lip-strapped Waterbury with a soothing
note from Mrs. Larkyn, would merely create a small trouble for a few
minutes. Mrs. Larkyn knew better. She knew that any poison dropped would
find good holding-ground in the heart of the Colonel's Wife.

The packet, and a note containing a few remarks on the Colonel's
calling-hours, were sent over to the Colonel's Wife, who wept in her own
room and took counsel with herself.

If there was one woman under Heaven whom the Colonel's Wife hated with
holy fervor, it was Mrs. Larkyn. Mrs. Larkyn was a frivolous lady,
and called the Colonel's Wife “old cat.” The Colonel's Wife said that
somebody in Revelations was remarkably like Mrs. Larkyn. She mentioned
other Scripture people as well. From the Old Testament. [But the
Colonel's Wife was the only person who cared or dared to say anything
against Mrs. Larkyn. Every one else accepted her as an amusing, honest
little body.] Wherefore, to believe that her husband had been shedding
watches under that “Thing's” window at ungodly hours, coupled with the
fact of his late arrival on the previous night, was.....

At this point she rose up and sought her husband. He denied everything
except the ownership of the watch. She besought him, for his Soul's
sake, to speak the truth. He denied afresh, with two bad words. Then a
stony silence held the Colonel's Wife, while a man could draw his breath
five times.

The speech that followed is no affair of mine or yours. It was made up
of wifely and womanly jealousy; knowledge of old age and sunken cheeks;
deep mistrust born of the text that says even little babies' hearts
are as bad as they make them; rancorous hatred of Mrs. Larkyn, and the
tenets of the creed of the Colonel's Wife's upbringing.

Over and above all, was the damning lip-strapped Waterbury, ticking away
in the palm of her shaking, withered hand. At that hour, I think, the
Colonel's Wife realized a little of the restless suspicions she had
injected into old Laplace's mind, a little of poor Miss Haughtrey's
misery, and some of the canker that ate into Buxton's heart as he
watched his wife dying before his eyes. The Colonel stammered and tried
to explain. Then he remembered that his watch had disappeared; and the
mystery grew greater. The Colonel's Wife talked and prayed by turns
till she was tired, and went away to devise means for “chastening the
stubborn heart of her husband.” Which translated, means, in our slang,
“tail-twisting.”

You see, being deeply impressed with the doctrine of Original Sin, she
could not believe in the face of appearances. She knew too much, and
jumped to the wildest conclusions.

But it was good for her. It spoilt her life, as she had spoilt the life
of the Laplaces. She had lost her faith in the Colonel, and--here the
creed-suspicion came in--he might, she argued, have erred many times,
before a merciful Providence, at the hands of so unworthy an instrument
as Mrs. Larkyn, had established his guilt. He was a bad, wicked,
gray-haired profligate. This may sound too sudden a revulsion for a
long-wedded wife; but it is a venerable fact that, if a man or woman
makes a practice of, and takes a delight in, believing and spreading
evil of people indifferent to him or her, he or she will end in
believing evil of folk very near and dear. You may think, also, that
the mere incident of the watch was too small and trivial to raise this
misunderstanding. It is another aged fact that, in life as well as
racing, all the worst accidents happen at little ditches and cut-down
fences. In the same way, you sometimes see a woman who would have made a
Joan of Arc in another century and climate, threshing herself to pieces
over all the mean worry of housekeeping. But that is another story.

Her belief only made the Colonel's Wife more wretched, because it
insisted so strongly on the villainy of men. Remembering what she had
done, it was pleasant to watch her unhappiness, and the penny-farthing
attempts she made to hide it from the Station. But the Station knew and
laughed heartlessly; for they had heard the story of the watch, with
much dramatic gesture, from Mrs. Larkyn's lips.

Once or twice Platte said to Mrs. Larkyn, seeing that the Colonel had
not cleared himself:--“This thing has gone far enough. I move we tell
the Colonel's Wife how it happened.” Mrs. Larkyn shut her lips and shook
her head, and vowed that the Colonel's Wife must bear her punishment
as best she could. Now Mrs. Larkyn was a frivolous woman, in whom none
would have suspected deep hate. So Platte took no action, and came to
believe gradually, from the Colonel's silence, that the Colonel must
have “run off the line” somewhere that night, and, therefore, preferred
to stand sentence on the lesser count of rambling into other people's
compounds out of calling hours. Platte forgot about the watch business
after a while, and moved down-country with his regiment. Mrs. Larkyn
went home when her husband's tour of Indian service expired. She never
forgot.

But Platte was quite right when he said that the joke had gone too far.
The mistrust and the tragedy of it--which we outsiders cannot see and
do not believe in--are killing the Colonel's Wife, and are making the
Colonel wretched. If either of them read this story, they can depend
upon its being a fairly true account of the case, and can “kiss and make
friends.”

Shakespeare alludes to the pleasure of watching an Engineer being
shelled by his own Battery. Now this shows that poets should not write
about what they do not understand. Any one could have told him that
Sappers and Gunners are perfectly different branches of the Service.
But, if you correct the sentence, and substitute Gunner for Sapper, the
moral comes just the same.




THE OTHER MAN.


     When the earth was sick and the skies were gray,
       And the woods were rotted with rain,
     The Dead Man rode through the autumn day
       To visit his love again.

                                       Old Ballad.


Far back in the “seventies,” before they had built any Public Offices at
Simla, and the broad road round Jakko lived in a pigeon-hole in the P.
W. D. hovels, her parents made Miss Gaurey marry Colonel Schriederling.
He could not have been MUCH more than thirty-five years her senior; and,
as he lived on two hundred rupees a month and had money of his own,
he was well off. He belonged to good people, and suffered in the cold
weather from lung complaints. In the hot weather he dangled on the brink
of heat-apoplexy; but it never quite killed him.

Understand, I do not blame Schriederling. He was a good husband
according to his lights, and his temper only failed him when he was
being nursed. Which was some seventeen days in each month. He was almost
generous to his wife about money matters, and that, for him, was a
concession. Still Mrs. Schreiderling was not happy. They married her
when she was this side of twenty and had given all her poor little heart
to another man. I have forgotten his name, but we will call him
the Other Man. He had no money and no prospects. He was not even
good-looking; and I think he was in the Commissariat or Transport. But,
in spite of all these things, she loved him very madly; and there was
some sort of an engagement between the two when Schreiderling appeared
and told Mrs. Gaurey that he wished to marry her daughter. Then the
other engagement was broken off--washed away by Mrs. Gaurey's tears,
for that lady governed her house by weeping over disobedience to her
authority and the lack of reverence she received in her old age. The
daughter did not take after her mother. She never cried. Not even at the
wedding.

The Other Man bore his loss quietly, and was transferred to as bad a
station as he could find. Perhaps the climate consoled him. He suffered
from intermittent fever, and that may have distracted him from his other
trouble. He was weak about the heart also. Both ways. One of the valves
was affected, and the fever made it worse. This showed itself later on.

Then many months passed, and Mrs. Schreiderling took to being ill. She
did not pine away like people in story books, but she seemed to pick
up every form of illness that went about a station, from simple fever
upwards. She was never more than ordinarily pretty at the best of times;
and the illness made her ugly. Schreiderling said so. He prided himself
on speaking his mind.

When she ceased being pretty, he left her to her own devices, and went
back to the lairs of his bachelordom. She used to trot up and down Simla
Mall in a forlorn sort of way, with a gray Terai hat well on the back
of her head, and a shocking bad saddle under her. Schreiderling's
generosity stopped at the horse. He said that any saddle would do for
a woman as nervous as Mrs. Schreiderling. She never was asked to dance,
because she did not dance well; and she was so dull and uninteresting,
that her box very seldom had any cards in it. Schreiderling said that
if he had known that she was going to be such a scare-crow after her
marriage, he would never have married her. He always prided himself on
speaking his mind, did Schreiderling!

He left her at Simla one August, and went down to his regiment. Then she
revived a little, but she never recovered her looks. I found out at the
Club that the Other Man is coming up sick--very sick--on an off chance
of recovery. The fever and the heart-valves had nearly killed him. She
knew that, too, and she knew--what I had no interest in knowing--when
he was coming up. I suppose he wrote to tell her. They had not seen each
other since a month before the wedding. And here comes the unpleasant
part of the story.

A late call kept me down at the Dovedell Hotel till dusk one evening.
Mrs. Schreidlerling had been flitting up and down the Mall all the
afternoon in the rain. Coming up along the Cart-road, a tonga passed me,
and my pony, tired with standing so long, set off at a canter. Just by
the road down to the Tonga Office Mrs. Schreiderling, dripping from head
to foot, was waiting for the tonga. I turned up-hill, as the tonga was
no affair of mine; and just then she began to shriek. I went back at
once and saw, under the Tonga Office lamps, Mrs. Schreiderling kneeling
in the wet road by the back seat of the newly-arrived tonga, screaming
hideously. Then she fell face down in the dirt as I came up.

Sitting in the back seat, very square and firm, with one hand on the
awning-stanchion and the wet pouring off his hat and moustache, was the
Other Man--dead. The sixty-mile up-hill jolt had been too much for his
valve, I suppose. The tonga-driver said:--“The Sahib died two stages out
of Solon. Therefore, I tied him with a rope, lest he should fall out
by the way, and so came to Simla. Will the Sahib give me bukshish? IT,”
 pointing to the Other Man, “should have given one rupee.”

The Other Man sat with a grin on his face, as if he enjoyed the joke of
his arrival; and Mrs. Schreiderling, in the mud, began to groan. There
was no one except us four in the office and it was raining heavily. The
first thing was to take Mrs. Schreiderling home, and the second was to
prevent her name from being mixed up with the affair. The tonga-driver
received five rupees to find a bazar 'rickshaw for Mrs. Schreiderling.
He was to tell the tonga Babu afterwards of the Other Man, and the Babu
was to make such arrangements as seemed best.

Mrs. Schreiderling was carried into the shed out of the rain, and for
three-quarters of an hour we two waited for the 'rickshaw. The Other
Man was left exactly as he had arrived. Mrs. Schreiderling would do
everything but cry, which might have helped her. She tried to scream as
soon as her senses came back, and then she began praying for the Other
Man's soul. Had she not been as honest as the day, she would have prayed
for her own soul too. I waited to hear her do this, but she did not.
Then I tried to get some of the mud off her habit. Lastly, the 'rickshaw
came, and I got her away--partly by force. It was a terrible business
from beginning to end; but most of all when the 'rickshaw had to squeeze
between the wall and the tonga, and she saw by the lamp-light that thin,
yellow hand grasping the awning-stanchion.

She was taken home just as every one was going to a dance at Viceregal
Lodge--“Peterhoff” it was then--and the doctor found that she had fallen
from her horse, that I had picked her up at the back of Jakko, and
really deserved great credit for the prompt manner in which I had
secured medical aid. She did not die--men of Schreiderling's stamp marry
women who don't die easily. They live and grow ugly.

She never told of her one meeting, since her marriage, with the Other
Man; and, when the chill and cough following the exposure of that
evening, allowed her abroad, she never by word or sign alluded to having
met me by the Tonga Office. Perhaps she never knew.

She used to trot up and down the Mall, on that shocking bad saddle,
looking as if she expected to meet some one round the corner every
minute. Two years afterward, she went Home, and died--at Bournemouth, I
think.

Schreiderling, when he grew maudlin at Mess, used to talk about “my
poor dear wife.” He always set great store on speaking his mind, did
Schreiderling!




CONSEQUENCES.


     Rosicrucian subtleties
     In the Orient had rise;
     Ye may find their teachers still
     Under Jacatala's Hill.
     Seek ye Bombast Paracelsus,
     Read what Flood the Seeker tells us
     Of the Dominant that runs
     Through the cycles of the Suns--
     Read my story last and see
     Luna at her apogee.


There are yearly appointments, and two-yearly appointments, and
five-yearly appointments at Simla, and there are, or used to be,
permanent appointments, whereon you stayed up for the term of your
natural life and secured red cheeks and a nice income. Of course, you
could descend in the cold weather; for Simla is rather dull then.

Tarrion came from goodness knows where--all away and away in some
forsaken part of Central India, where they call Pachmari a “Sanitarium,”
 and drive behind trotting bullocks, I believe. He belonged to a
regiment; but what he really wanted to do was to escape from his
regiment and live in Simla forever and ever. He had no preference for
anything in particular, beyond a good horse and a nice partner. He
thought he could do everything well; which is a beautiful belief when
you hold it with all your heart. He was clever in many ways, and good to
look at, and always made people round him comfortable--even in Central
India.

So he went up to Simla, and, because he was clever and amusing, he
gravitated naturally to Mrs. Hauksbee, who could forgive everything
but stupidity. Once he did her great service by changing the date on an
invitation-card for a big dance which Mrs. Hauksbee wished to attend,
but couldn't because she had quarrelled with the A.-D.-C., who took
care, being a mean man, to invite her to a small dance on the 6th
instead of the big Ball of the 26th. It was a very clever piece of
forgery; and when Mrs. Hauksbee showed the A.-D.-C. her invitation-card,
and chaffed him mildly for not better managing his vendettas, he really
thought he had made a mistake; and--which was wise--realized that it
was no use to fight with Mrs. Hauksbee. She was grateful to Tarrion and
asked what she could do for him. He said simply: “I'm a Freelance up
here on leave, and on the lookout for what I can loot. I haven't a
square inch of interest in all Simla. My name isn't known to any man
with an appointment in his gift, and I want an appointment--a good,
sound, pukka one. I believe you can do anything you turn yourself to do.
Will you help me?” Mrs. Hauksbee thought for a minute, and passed
the last of her riding-whip through her lips, as was her custom when
thinking. Then her eyes sparkled, and she said:--“I will;” and she shook
hands on it. Tarrion, having perfect confidence in this great woman,
took no further thought of the business at all. Except to wonder what
sort of an appointment he would win.

Mrs. Hauksbee began calculating the prices of all the Heads of
Departments and Members of Council she knew, and the more she thought
the more she laughed, because her heart was in the game and it amused
her. Then she took a Civil List and ran over a few of the appointments.
There are some beautiful appointments in the Civil List. Eventually, she
decided that, though Tarrion was too good for the Political Department,
she had better begin by trying to get him in there. What were her own
plans to this end, does not matter in the least, for Luck or Fate played
into her hands, and she had nothing to do but to watch the course of
events and take the credit of them.

All Viceroys, when they first come out, pass through the “Diplomatic
Secrecy” craze. It wears off in time; but they all catch it in the
beginning, because they are new to the country. The particular Viceroy
who was suffering from the complaint just then--this was a long time
ago, before Lord Dufferin ever came from Canada, or Lord Ripon from the
bosom of the English Church--had it very badly; and the result was that
men who were new to keeping official secrets went about looking unhappy;
and the Viceroy plumed himself on the way in which he had instilled
notions of reticence into his Staff.

Now, the Supreme Government have a careless custom of committing
what they do to printed papers. These papers deal with all sorts of
things--from the payment of Rs. 200 to a “secret service” native, up to
rebukes administered to Vakils and Motamids of Native States, and rather
brusque letters to Native Princes, telling them to put their houses
in order, to refrain from kidnapping women, or filling offenders with
pounded red pepper, and eccentricities of that kind. Of course, these
things could never be made public, because Native Princes never err
officially, and their States are, officially, as well administered as
Our territories. Also, the private allowances to various queer people
are not exactly matters to put into newspapers, though they give quaint
reading sometimes. When the Supreme Government is at Simla, these papers
are prepared there, and go round to the people who ought to see them in
office-boxes or by post. The principle of secrecy was to that Viceroy
quite as important as the practice, and he held that a benevolent
despotism like Ours should never allow even little things, such as
appointments of subordinate clerks, to leak out till the proper time. He
was always remarkable for his principles.

There was a very important batch of papers in preparation at that time.
It had to travel from one end of Simla to the other by hand. It was not
put into an official envelope, but a large, square, pale-pink one; the
matter being in MS. on soft crinkley paper. It was addressed to “The
Head Clerk, etc., etc.” Now, between “The Head Clerk, etc., etc.,”
 and “Mrs. Hauksbee” and a flourish, is no very great difference if the
address be written in a very bad hand, as this was. The chaprassi who
took the envelope was not more of an idiot than most chaprassis. He
merely forgot where this most unofficial cover was to be delivered, and
so asked the first Englishman he met, who happened to be a man riding
down to Annandale in a great hurry. The Englishman hardly looked, said:
“Hauksbee Sahib ki Mem,” and went on. So did the chaprasss, because that
letter was the last in stock and he wanted to get his work over. There
was no book to sign; he thrust the letter into Mrs. Hauksbee's bearer's
hands and went off to smoke with a friend. Mrs. Hauksbee was expecting
some cut-out pattern things in flimsy paper from a friend. As soon
as she got the big square packet, therefore, she said, “Oh, the
DEAR creature!” and tore it open with a paper-knife, and all the MS.
enclosures tumbled out on the floor.

Mrs. Hauksbee began reading. I have said the batch was rather
important. That is quite enough for you to know. It referred to some
correspondence, two measures, a peremptory order to a native chief and
two dozen other things. Mrs. Hauksbee gasped as she read, for the first
glimpse of the naked machinery of the Great Indian Government, stripped
of its casings, and lacquer, and paint, and guard-rails, impresses even
the most stupid man. And Mrs. Hauksbee was a clever woman. She was
a little afraid at first, and felt as if she had laid hold of a
lightning-flash by the tail, and did not quite know what to do with it.
There were remarks and initials at the side of the papers; and some
of the remarks were rather more severe than the papers. The initials
belonged to men who are all dead or gone now; but they were great in
their day. Mrs. Hauksbee read on and thought calmly as she read. Then
the value of her trove struck her, and she cast about for the best
method of using it. Then Tarrion dropped in, and they read through all
the papers together, and Tarrion, not knowing how she had come by
them, vowed that Mrs. Hauksbee was the greatest woman on earth. Which I
believe was true, or nearly so.

“The honest course is always the best,” said Tarrion after an hour and a
half of study and conversation. “All things considered, the Intelligence
Branch is about my form. Either that or the Foreign Office. I go to lay
siege to the High Gods in their Temples.”

He did not seek a little man, or a little big man, or a weak Head of a
strong Department, but he called on the biggest and strongest man that
the Government owned, and explained that he wanted an appointment at
Simla on a good salary. The compound insolence of this amused the Strong
Man, and, as he had nothing to do for the moment, he listened to the
proposals of the audacious Tarrion. “You have, I presume, some special
qualifications, besides the gift of self-assertion, for the claims you
put forwards?” said the Strong Man. “That, Sir,” said Tarrion, “is for
you to judge.” Then he began, for he had a good memory, quoting a few of
the more important notes in the papers--slowly and one by one as a
man drops chlorodyne into a glass. When he had reached the peremptory
order--and it WAS a peremptory order--the Strong Man was troubled.

Tarrion wound up:--“And I fancy that special knowledge of this kind is
at least as valuable for, let us say, a berth in the Foreign Office, as
the fact of being the nephew of a distinguished officer's wife.” That hit
the Strong Man hard, for the last appointment to the Foreign Office had
been by black favor, and he knew it. “I'll see what I can do for you,”
 said the Strong Man. “Many thanks,” said Tarrion. Then he left, and the
Strong Man departed to see how the appointment was to be blocked.

    .   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

Followed a pause of eleven days; with thunders and lightnings and much
telegraphing. The appointment was not a very important one, carrying
only between Rs. 500 and Rs. 700 a month; but, as the Viceroy said, it
was the principle of diplomatic secrecy that had to be maintained,
and it was more than likely that a boy so well supplied with special
information would be worth translating. So they translated him. They
must have suspected him, though he protested that his information was
due to singular talents of his own. Now, much of this story, including
the after-history of the missing envelope, you must fill in for
yourself, because there are reasons why it cannot be written. If you do
not know about things Up Above, you won't understand how to fill it in,
and you will say it is impossible.

What the Viceroy said when Tarrion was introduced to him was:--“So, this
is the boy who 'rushed' the Government of India, is it? Recollect, Sir,
that is not done TWICE.” So he must have known something.

What Tarrion said when he saw his appointment gazetted was:--“If Mrs.
Hauksbee were twenty years younger, and I her husband, I should be
Viceroy of India in twenty years.”

What Mrs. Hauksbee said, when Tarrion thanked her, almost with tears
in his eyes, was first:--“I told you so!” and next, to herself:--“What
fools men are!”




THE CONVERSION OF AURELIAN McGOGGIN.


     Ride with an idle whip, ride with an unused heel.
     But, once in a way, there will come a day
     When the colt must be taught to feel
     The lash that falls, and the curb that galls,
       and the sting of the rowelled steel.

                                    Life's Handicap.


This is not a tale exactly. It is a Tract; and I am immensely proud of
it. Making a Tract is a Feat.

Every man is entitled to his own religious opinions; but no man--least
of all a junior--has a right to thrust these down other men's throats.
The Government sends out weird Civilians now and again; but McGoggin
was the queerest exported for a long time. He was clever--brilliantly
clever--but his cleverness worked the wrong way. Instead of keeping to
the study of the vernaculars, he had read some books written by a
man called Comte, I think, and a man called Spencer, and a Professor
Clifford. [You will find these books in the Library.] They deal with
people's insides from the point of view of men who have no stomachs.
There was no order against his reading them; but his Mamma should have
smacked him. They fermented in his head, and he came out to India with
a rarefied religion over and above his work. It was not much of a
creed. It only proved that men had no souls, and there was no God and
no hereafter, and that you must worry along somehow for the good of
Humanity.

One of its minor tenets seemed to be that the one thing more sinful than
giving an order was obeying it. At least, that was what McGoggin said;
but I suspect he had misread his primers.

I do not say a word against this creed. It was made up in Town, where
there is nothing but machinery and asphalt and building--all shut in
by the fog. Naturally, a man grows to think that there is no one higher
than himself, and that the Metropolitan Board of Works made everything.
But in this country, where you really see humanity--raw, brown, naked
humanity--with nothing between it and the blazing sky, and only the
used-up, over-handled earth underfoot, the notion somehow dies away,
and most folk come back to simpler theories. Life, in India, is not long
enough to waste in proving that there is no one in particular at the
head of affairs. For this reason. The Deputy is above the Assistant,
the Commissioner above the Deputy, the Lieutenant-Governor above the
Commissioner, and the Viceroy above all four, under the orders of the
Secretary of State, who is responsible to the Empress. If the Empress
be not responsible to her Maker--if there is no Maker for her to be
responsible to--the entire system of Our administration must be wrong.
Which is manifestly impossible. At Home men are to be excused. They are
stalled up a good deal and get intellectually “beany.” When you take a
gross, “beany” horse to exercise, he slavers and slobbers over the bit
till you can't see the horns. But the bit is there just the same. Men do
not get “beany” in India. The climate and the work are against playing
bricks with words.

If McGoggin had kept his creed, with the capital letters and the endings
in “isms,” to himself, no one would have cared; but his grandfathers on
both sides had been Wesleyan preachers, and the preaching strain came
out in his mind. He wanted every one at the Club to see that they had no
souls too, and to help him to eliminate his Creator. As a good many men
told him, HE undoubtedly had no soul, because he was so young, but it
did not follow that his seniors were equally undeveloped; and, whether
there was another world or not, a man still wanted to read his papers in
this. “But that is not the point--that is not the point!” Aurelian used
to say. Then men threw sofa-cushions at him and told him to go to
any particular place he might believe in. They christened him the
“Blastoderm”--he said he came from a family of that name somewhere, in
the pre-historic ages--and, by insult and laughter, strove to choke him
dumb, for he was an unmitigated nuisance at the Club; besides being an
offence to the older men. His Deputy Commissioner, who was working on
the Frontier when Aurelian was rolling on a bed-quilt, told him that,
for a clever boy, Aurelian was a very big idiot. And, you know, if
he had gone on with his work, he would have been caught up to the
Secretariat in a few years. He was just the type that goes there--all
head, no physique and a hundred theories. Not a soul was interested in
McGoggin's soul. He might have had two, or none, or somebody's else's.
His business was to obey orders and keep abreast of his files instead of
devastating the Club with “isms.”

He worked brilliantly; but he could not accept any order without
trying to better it. That was the fault of his creed. It made men too
responsible and left too much to their honor. You can sometimes ride an
old horse in a halter; but never a colt. McGoggin took more trouble
over his cases than any of the men of his year. He may have fancied that
thirty-page judgments on fifty-rupee cases--both sides perjured to the
gullet--advanced the cause of Humanity. At any rate, he worked too much,
and worried and fretted over the rebukes he received, and lectured away
on his ridiculous creed out of office, till the Doctor had to warn him
that he was overdoing it. No man can toil eighteen annas in the rupee
in June without suffering. But McGoggin was still intellectually “beany”
 and proud of himself and his powers, and he would take no hint. He
worked nine hours a day steadily.

“Very well,” said the doctor, “you'll break down because you are
over-engined for your beam.” McGoggin was a little chap.

One day, the collapse came--as dramatically as if it had been meant to
embellish a Tract.

It was just before the Rains. We were sitting in the verandah in the
dead, hot, close air, gasping and praying that the black-blue clouds
would let down and bring the cool. Very, very far away, there was a
faint whisper, which was the roar of the Rains breaking over the river.
One of the men heard it, got out of his chair, listened, and said,
naturally enough:--“Thank God!”

Then the Blastoderm turned in his place and said:--“Why? I assure you
it's only the result of perfectly natural causes--atmospheric phenomena
of the simplest kind. Why you should, therefore, return thanks to a
Being who never did exist--who is only a figment--”

“Blastoderm,” grunted the man in the next chair, “dry up, and throw
me over the Pioneer. We know all about your figments.” The Blastoderm
reached out to the table, took up one paper, and jumped as if something
had stung him. Then he handed the paper over.

“As I was saying,” he went on slowly and with an effort--“due to
perfectly natural causes--perfectly natural causes. I mean--”

“Hi! Blastoderm, you've given me the Calcutta Mercantile Advertiser.”

The dust got up in little whorls, while the treetops rocked and the
kites whistled. But no one was looking at the coming of the Rains. We
were all staring at the Blastoderm, who had risen from his chair and was
fighting with his speech. Then he said, still more slowly:--

“Perfectly conceivable--dictionary--red
oak--amenable--cause--retaining--shuttlecock--alone.”

“Blastoderm's drunk,” said one man. But the Blastoderm was not drunk. He
looked at us in a dazed sort of way, and began motioning with his hands
in the half light as the clouds closed overhead. Then--with a scream:--

“What is it?--Can't--reserve--attainable--market--obscure--”

But his speech seemed to freeze in him, and--just as the lightning shot
two tongues that cut the whole sky into three pieces and the rain fell
in quivering sheets--the Blastoderm was struck dumb. He stood pawing and
champing like a hard-held horse, and his eyes were full of terror.

The Doctor came over in three minutes, and heard the story. “It's
aphasia,” he said. “Take him to his room. I KNEW the smash would come.”
 We carried the Blastoderm across, in the pouring rain, to his quarters,
and the Doctor gave him bromide of potassium to make him sleep.

Then the Doctor came back to us and told us that aphasia was like all
the arrears of “Punjab Head” falling in a lump; and that only once
before--in the case of a sepoy--had he met with so complete a case.
I myself have seen mild aphasia in an overworked man, but this sudden
dumbness was uncanny--though, as the Blastoderm himself might have said,
due to “perfectly natural causes.”

“He'll have to take leave after this,” said the Doctor. “He won't be
fit for work for another three months. No; it isn't insanity or anything
like it. It's only complete loss of control over the speech and memory.
I fancy it will keep the Blastoderm quiet, though.”

Two days later, the Blastoderm found his tongue again. The first
question he asked was: “What was it?” The Doctor enlightened him. “But I
can't understand it!” said the Blastoderm; “I'm quite sane; but I can't
be sure of my mind, it seems--my OWN memory--can I?”

“Go up into the Hills for three months, and don't think about it,” said
the Doctor.

“But I can't understand it,” repeated the Blastoderm. “It was my OWN
mind and memory.”

“I can't help it,” said the Doctor; “there are a good many things you
can't understand; and, by the time you have put in my length of service,
you'll know exactly how much a man dare call his own in this world.”

The stroke cowed the Blastoderm. He could not understand it. He went
into the Hills in fear and trembling, wondering whether he would be
permitted to reach the end of any sentence he began.

This gave him a wholesome feeling of mistrust. The legitimate
explanation, that he had been overworking himself, failed to satisfy
him. Something had wiped his lips of speech, as a mother wipes the milky
lips of her child, and he was afraid--horribly afraid.

So the Club had rest when he returned; and if ever you come across
Aurelian McGoggin laying down the law on things Human--he doesn't seem
to know as much as he used to about things Divine--put your forefinger
on your lip for a moment, and see what happens.

Don't blame me if he throws a glass at your head!




A GERM DESTROYER.


     Pleasant it is for the Little Tin Gods,
       When great Jove nods;
     But Little Tin Gods make their little mistakes
     In missing the hour when great Jove wakes.


As a general rule, it is inexpedient to meddle with questions of State
in a land where men are highly paid to work them out for you. This tale
is a justifiable exception.

Once in every five years, as you know, we indent for a new Viceroy; and
each Viceroy imports, with the rest of his baggage, a Private Secretary,
who may or may not be the real Viceroy, just as Fate ordains. Fate looks
after the Indian Empire because it is so big and so helpless.

There was a Viceroy once, who brought out with him a turbulent Private
Secretary--a hard man with a soft manner and a morbid passion for
work. This Secretary was called Wonder--John Fennil Wonder. The Viceroy
possessed no name--nothing but a string of counties and two-thirds
of the alphabet after them. He said, in confidence, that he was the
electro-plated figurehead of a golden administration, and he watched
in a dreamy, amused way Wonder's attempts to draw matters which were
entirely outside his province into his own hands. “When we are all
cherubims together,” said His Excellency once, “my dear, good friend
Wonder will head the conspiracy for plucking out Gabriel's tail-feathers
or stealing Peter's keys. THEN I shall report him.”

But, though the Viceroy did nothing to check Wonder's officiousness,
other people said unpleasant things. Maybe the Members of Council began
it; but, finally, all Simla agreed that there was “too much Wonder,
and too little Viceroy,” in that regime. Wonder was always quoting “His
Excellency.” It was “His Excellency this,” “His Excellency that,” “In
the opinion of His Excellency,” and so on. The Viceroy smiled; but he
did not heed. He said that, so long as his old men squabbled with his
“dear, good Wonder,” they might be induced to leave the “Immemorial
East” in peace.

“No wise man has a policy,” said the Viceroy. “A Policy is the blackmail
levied on the Fool by the Unforeseen. I am not the former, and I do not
believe in the latter.”

I do not quite see what this means, unless it refers to an Insurance
Policy. Perhaps it was the Viceroy's way of saying:--“Lie low.”

That season, came up to Simla one of these crazy people with only a
single idea. These are the men who make things move; but they are not
nice to talk to. This man's name was Mellish, and he had lived for
fifteen years on land of his own, in Lower Bengal, studying cholera. He
held that cholera was a germ that propagated itself as it flew through a
muggy atmosphere; and stuck in the branches of trees like a wool-flake.
The germ could be rendered sterile, he said, by “Mellish's Own
Invincible Fumigatory”--a heavy violet-black powder--“the result of
fifteen years' scientific investigation, Sir!”

Inventors seem very much alike as a caste. They talk loudly, especially
about “conspiracies of monopolists;” they beat upon the table with
their fists; and they secrete fragments of their inventions about their
persons.

Mellish said that there was a Medical “Ring” at Simla, headed by the
Surgeon-General, who was in league, apparently, with all the Hospital
Assistants in the Empire. I forget exactly how he proved it, but it had
something to do with “skulking up to the Hills;” and what Mellish
wanted was the independent evidence of the Viceroy--“Steward of our
Most Gracious Majesty the Queen, Sir.” So Mellish went up to Simla, with
eighty-four pounds of Fumigatory in his trunk, to speak to the Viceroy
and to show him the merits of the invention.

But it is easier to see a Viceroy than to talk to him, unless you chance
to be as important as Mellishe of Madras. He was a six-thousand-rupee
man, so great that his daughters never “married.” They “contracted
alliances.” He himself was not paid. He “received emoluments,” and his
journeys about the country were “tours of observation.” His business was
to stir up the people in Madras with a long pole--as you stir up stench
in a pond--and the people had to come up out of their comfortable old
ways and gasp:--“This is Enlightenment and progress. Isn't it fine!”
 Then they gave Mellishe statues and jasmine garlands, in the hope of
getting rid of him.

Mellishe came up to Simla “to confer with the Viceroy.” That was one of
his perquisites. The Viceroy knew nothing of Mellishe except that he was
“one of those middle-class deities who seem necessary to the spiritual
comfort of this Paradise of the Middle-classes,” and that, in all
probability, he had “suggested, designed, founded, and endowed all the
public institutions in Madras.” Which proves that His Excellency, though
dreamy, had experience of the ways of six-thousand-rupee men.

Mellishe's name was E. Mellishe and Mellish's was E. S. Mellish, and
they were both staying at the same hotel, and the Fate that looks after
the Indian Empire ordained that Wonder should blunder and drop the final
“e;” that the Chaprassi should help him, and that the note which ran:
“Dear Mr. Mellish.--Can you set aside your other engagements and lunch
with us at two to-morrow? His Excellency has an hour at your disposal
then,” should be given to Mellish with the Fumigatory. He nearly wept
with pride and delight, and at the appointed hour cantered off to
Peterhoff, a big paper-bag full of the Fumigatory in his coat-tail
pockets. He had his chance, and he meant to make the most of
it. Mellishe of Madras had been so portentously solemn about his
“conference,” that Wonder had arranged for a private tiffin--no A.-D.
C.'s, no Wonder, no one but the Viceroy, who said plaintively that he
feared being left alone with unmuzzled autocrats like the great Mellishe
of Madras.

But his guest did not bore the Viceroy. On the contrary, he amused him.
Mellish was nervously anxious to go straight to his Fumigatory, and
talked at random until tiffin was over and His Excellency asked him
to smoke. The Viceroy was pleased with Mellish because he did not talk
“shop.”

As soon as the cheroots were lit, Mellish spoke like a man; beginning
with his cholera-theory, reviewing his fifteen years' “scientific
labors,” the machinations of the “Simla Ring,” and the excellence of
his Fumigatory, while the Viceroy watched him between half-shut eyes
and thought: “Evidently, this is the wrong tiger; but it is an original
animal.” Mellish's hair was standing on end with excitement, and he
stammered. He began groping in his coat-tails and, before the Viceroy
knew what was about to happen, he had tipped a bagful of his powder into
the big silver ash-tray.

“J-j-judge for yourself, Sir,” said Mellish. “Y' Excellency shall judge
for yourself! Absolutely infallible, on my honor.”

He plunged the lighted end of his cigar into the powder, which began to
smoke like a volcano, and send up fat, greasy wreaths of copper-colored
smoke. In five seconds the room was filled with a most pungent and
sickening stench--a reek that took fierce hold of the trap of your
windpipe and shut it. The powder then hissed and fizzed, and sent out
blue and green sparks, and the smoke rose till you could neither see,
nor breathe, nor gasp. Mellish, however, was used to it.

“Nitrate of strontia,” he shouted; “baryta, bone-meal, etcetera!
Thousand cubic feet smoke per cubic inch. Not a germ could live--not a
germ, Y' Excellency!”

But His Excellency had fled, and was coughing at the foot of the stairs,
while all Peterhoff hummed like a hive. Red Lancers came in, and the
Head Chaprassi, who speaks English, came in, and mace-bearers came in,
and ladies ran downstairs screaming “fire;” for the smoke was drifting
through the house and oozing out of the windows, and bellying along the
verandahs, and wreathing and writhing across the gardens. No one could
enter the room where Mellish was lecturing on his Fumigatory, till that
unspeakable powder had burned itself out.

Then an Aide-de-Camp, who desired the V. C., rushed through the rolling
clouds and hauled Mellish into the hall. The Viceroy was prostrate with
laughter, and could only waggle his hands feebly at Mellish, who was
shaking a fresh bagful of powder at him.

“Glorious! Glorious!” sobbed his Excellency. “Not a germ, as you justly
observe, could exist! I can swear it. A magnificent success!”

Then he laughed till the tears came, and Wonder, who had caught the real
Mellishe snorting on the Mall, entered and was deeply shocked at the
scene. But the Viceroy was delighted, because he saw that Wonder would
presently depart. Mellish with the Fumigatory was also pleased, for he
felt that he had smashed the Simla Medical “Ring.”

    .    .    .    .     .    .    .    .    .

Few men could tell a story like His Excellency when he took the trouble,
and the account of “my dear, good Wonder's friend with the powder”
 went the round of Simla, and flippant folk made Wonder unhappy by their
remarks.

But His Excellency told the tale once too often--for Wonder. As he meant
to do. It was at a Seepee Picnic. Wonder was sitting just behind the
Viceroy.

“And I really thought for a moment,” wound up His Excellency, “that my
dear, good Wonder had hired an assassin to clear his way to the throne!”

Every one laughed; but there was a delicate subtinkle in the Viceroy's
tone which Wonder understood. He found that his health was giving way;
and the Viceroy allowed him to go, and presented him with a flaming
“character” for use at Home among big people.

“My fault entirely,” said His Excellency, in after seasons, with
a twinkling in his eye. “My inconsistency must always have been
distasteful to such a masterly man.”




KIDNAPPED.


     There is a tide in the affairs of men,
     Which, taken any way you please, is bad,
     And strands them in forsaken guts and creeks
     No decent soul would think of visiting.
     You cannot stop the tide; but now and then,
     You may arrest some rash adventurer
     Who--h'm--will hardly thank you for your pains.

                                Vibart's Moralities.



We are a high-caste and enlightened race, and infant-marriage is very
shocking and the consequences are sometimes peculiar; but, nevertheless,
the Hindu notion--which is the Continental notion--which is the
aboriginal notion--of arranging marriages irrespective of the personal
inclinations of the married, is sound. Think for a minute, and you will
see that it must be so; unless, of course, you believe in “affinities.”
 In which case you had better not read this tale. How can a man who has
never married; who cannot be trusted to pick up at sight a moderately
sound horse; whose head is hot and upset with visions of domestic
felicity, go about the choosing of a wife? He cannot see straight or
think straight if he tries; and the same disadvantages exist in the
case of a girl's fancies. But when mature, married and discreet people
arrange a match between a boy and a girl, they do it sensibly, with a
view to the future, and the young couple live happily ever afterwards.
As everybody knows.

Properly speaking, Government should establish a Matrimonial Department,
efficiently officered, with a Jury of Matrons, a Judge of the Chief
Court, a Senior Chaplain, and an Awful Warning, in the shape of a
love-match that has gone wrong, chained to the trees in the courtyard.
All marriages should be made through the Department, which might be
subordinate to the Educational Department, under the same penalty as
that attaching to the transfer of land without a stamped document. But
Government won't take suggestions. It pretends that it is too busy.
However, I will put my notion on record, and explain the example that
illustrates the theory.

Once upon a time there was a good young man--a first-class officer in
his own Department--a man with a career before him and, possibly, a K.
C. G. E. at the end of it. All his superiors spoke well of him, because
he knew how to hold his tongue and his pen at the proper times. There
are to-day only eleven men in India who possess this secret; and they
have all, with one exception, attained great honor and enormous incomes.

This good young man was quiet and self-contained--too old for his years
by far. Which always carries its own punishment. Had a Subaltern, or a
Tea-Planter's Assistant, or anybody who enjoys life and has no care for
to-morrow, done what he tried to do not a soul would have cared.
But when Peythroppe--the estimable, virtuous, economical, quiet,
hard-working, young Peythroppe--fell, there was a flutter through five
Departments.

The manner of his fall was in this way. He met a Miss
Castries--d'Castries it was originally, but the family dropped the
d' for administrative reasons--and he fell in love with her even more
energetically that he worked. Understand clearly that there was not a
breath of a word to be said against Miss Castries--not a shadow of a
breath. She was good and very lovely--possessed what innocent people at
home call a “Spanish” complexion, with thick blue-black hair growing low
down on her forehead, into a “widow's peak,” and big violet eyes
under eyebrows as black and as straight as the borders of a Gazette
Extraordinary when a big man dies. But--but--but--. Well, she was a VERY
sweet girl and very pious, but for many reasons she was “impossible.”
 Quite so. All good Mammas know what “impossible” means. It was obviously
absurd that Peythroppe should marry her. The little opal-tinted onyx
at the base of her finger-nails said this as plainly as print.
Further, marriage with Miss Castries meant marriage with several other
Castries--Honorary Lieutenant Castries, her Papa, Mrs. Eulalie Castries,
her Mamma, and all the ramifications of the Castries family, on incomes
ranging from Rs. 175 to Rs. 470 a month, and THEIR wives and connections
again.

It would have been cheaper for Peythroppe to have assaulted a
Commissioner with a dog-whip, or to have burned the records of a Deputy
Commissioner's Office, than to have contracted an alliance with the
Castries. It would have weighted his after-career less--even under a
Government which never forgets and NEVER forgives. Everybody saw this
but Peythroppe. He was going to marry Miss Castries, he was--being of
age and drawing a good income--and woe betide the house that would not
afterwards receive Mrs. Virginie Saulez Peythroppe with the deference
due to her husband's rank. That was Peythroppe's ultimatum, and any
remonstrance drove him frantic.

These sudden madnesses most afflict the sanest men. There was a case
once--but I will tell you of that later on. You cannot account for the
mania, except under a theory directly contradicting the one about the
Place wherein marriages are made. Peythroppe was burningly anxious to
put a millstone round his neck at the outset of his career and argument
had not the least effect on him. He was going to marry Miss Castries,
and the business was his own business. He would thank you to keep your
advice to yourself. With a man in this condition, mere words only fix
him in his purpose. Of course he cannot see that marriage out here does
not concern the individual but the Government he serves.

Do you remember Mrs. Hauksbee--the most wonderful woman in India? She
saved Pluffles from Mrs. Reiver, won Tarrion his appointment in the
Foreign Office, and was defeated in open field by Mrs. Cusack-Bremmil.
She heard of the lamentable condition of Peythroppe, and her brain
struck out the plan that saved him. She had the wisdom of the Serpent,
the logical coherence of the Man, the fearlessness of the Child, and
the triple intuition of the Woman. Never--no, never--as long as a tonga
buckets down the Solon dip, or the couples go a-riding at the back of
Summer Hill, will there be such a genius as Mrs. Hauksbee. She attended
the consultation of Three Men on Peythroppe's case; and she stood up
with the lash of her riding-whip between her lips and spake.

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

Three weeks later, Peythroppe dined with the Three Men, and the Gazette
of India came in. Peythroppe found to his surprise that he had been
gazetted a month's leave. Don't ask me how this was managed. I believe
firmly that if Mrs. Hauksbee gave the order, the whole Great Indian
Administration would stand on its head.

The Three Men had also a month's leave each. Peythroppe put the Gazette
down and said bad words. Then there came from the compound the soft
“pad-pad” of camels--“thieves' camels,” the bikaneer breed that don't
bubble and howl when they sit down and get up.

After that I don't know what happened. This much is certain. Peythroppe
disappeared--vanished like smoke--and the long foot-rest chair in the
house of the Three Men was broken to splinters. Also a bedstead departed
from one of the bedrooms.

Mrs. Hauksbee said that Mr. Peythroppe was shooting in Rajputana with
the Three Men; so we were compelled to believe her.

At the end of the month, Peythroppe was gazetted twenty days' extension
of leave; but there was wrath and lamentation in the house of Castries.
The marriage-day had been fixed, but the bridegroom never came; and the
D'Silvas, Pereiras, and Ducketts lifted their voices and mocked Honorary
Lieutenant Castries as one who had been basely imposed upon. Mrs.
Hauksbee went to the wedding, and was much astonished when Peythroppe
did not appear. After seven weeks, Peythroppe and the Three Men returned
from Rajputana. Peythroppe was in hard, tough condition, rather white,
and more self-contained than ever.

One of the Three Men had a cut on his nose, cause by the kick of a gun.
Twelve-bores kick rather curiously.

Then came Honorary Lieutenant Castries, seeking for the blood of his
perfidious son-in-law to be. He said things--vulgar and “impossible”
 things which showed the raw rough “ranker” below the “Honorary,” and I
fancy Peythroppe's eyes were opened. Anyhow, he held his peace till the
end; when he spoke briefly. Honorary Lieutenant Castries asked for a
“peg” before he went away to die or bring a suit for breach of promise.

Miss Castries was a very good girl. She said that she would have no
breach of promise suits. She said that, if she was not a lady, she
was refined enough to know that ladies kept their broken hearts to
themselves; and, as she ruled her parents, nothing happened. Later on,
she married a most respectable and gentlemanly person. He travelled for
an enterprising firm in Calcutta, and was all that a good husband should
be.

So Peythroppe came to his right mind again, and did much good work, and
was honored by all who knew him. One of these days he will marry; but he
will marry a sweet pink-and-white maiden, on the Government House List,
with a little money and some influential connections, as every wise man
should. And he will never, all his life, tell her what happened during
the seven weeks of his shooting-tour in Rajputana.

But just think how much trouble and expense--for camel hire is not
cheap, and those Bikaneer brutes had to be fed like humans--might have
been saved by a properly conducted Matrimonial Department, under the
control of the Director General of Education, but corresponding direct
with the Viceroy.




THE ARREST OF LIEUTENANT GOLIGHTLY.


   “'I've forgotten the countersign,' sez 'e.
   'Oh!  You 'aye, 'ave you?' sez I.
   'But I'm the Colonel,' sez 'e.
   'Oh!  You are, are you?' sez I.  'Colonel nor no Colonel, you waits
   'ere till I'm relieved, an' the Sarjint reports on your ugly old
   mug.  Coop!' sez I.
       .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
   An' s'help me soul, 'twas the Colonel after all!  But I was a
   recruity then.”

                     The Unedited Autobiography of Private Ortheris.


IF there was one thing on which Golightly prided himself more than
another, it was looking like “an Officer and a gentleman.” He said it
was for the honor of the Service that he attired himself so elaborately;
but those who knew him best said that it was just personal vanity. There
was no harm about Golightly--not an ounce. He recognized a horse when
he saw one, and could do more than fill a cantle. He played a very fair
game at billiards, and was a sound man at the whist-table. Everyone
liked him; and nobody ever dreamed of seeing him handcuffed on a station
platform as a deserter. But this sad thing happened.

He was going down from Dalhousie, at the end of his leave--riding down.
He had cut his leave as fine as he dared, and wanted to come down in a
hurry.

It was fairly warm at Dalhousie, and knowing what to expect below, he
descended in a new khaki suit--tight fitting--of a delicate olive-green;
a peacock-blue tie, white collar, and a snowy white solah helmet. He
prided himself on looking neat even when he was riding post. He did
look neat, and he was so deeply concerned about his appearance before he
started that he quite forgot to take anything but some small change with
him. He left all his notes at the hotel. His servants had gone down the
road before him, to be ready in waiting at Pathankote with a change of
gear. That was what he called travelling in “light marching-order.” He
was proud of his faculty of organization--what we call bundobust.

Twenty-two miles out of Dalhousie it began to rain--not a mere
hill-shower, but a good, tepid monsoonish downpour. Golightly bustled
on, wishing that he had brought an umbrella. The dust on the roads
turned into mud, and the pony mired a good deal. So did Golightly's
khaki gaiters. But he kept on steadily and tried to think how pleasant
the coolth was.

His next pony was rather a brute at starting, and Golightly's hands
being slippery with the rain, contrived to get rid of Golightly at a
corner. He chased the animal, caught it, and went ahead briskly. The
spill had not improved his clothes or his temper, and he had lost one
spur. He kept the other one employed. By the time that stage was ended,
the pony had had as much exercise as he wanted, and, in spite of the
rain, Golightly was sweating freely. At the end of another miserable
half-hour, Golightly found the world disappear before his eyes in clammy
pulp. The rain had turned the pith of his huge and snowy solah-topee
into an evil-smelling dough, and it had closed on his head like a
half-opened mushroom. Also the green lining was beginning to run.

Golightly did not say anything worth recording here. He tore off and
squeezed up as much of the brim as was in his eyes and ploughed on. The
back of the helmet was flapping on his neck and the sides stuck to
his ears, but the leather band and green lining kept things roughly
together, so that the hat did not actually melt away where it flapped.

Presently, the pulp and the green stuff made a sort of slimy mildew
which ran over Golightly in several directions--down his back and
bosom for choice. The khaki color ran too--it was really shockingly bad
dye--and sections of Golightly were brown, and patches were violet,
and contours were ochre, and streaks were ruddy red, and blotches were
nearly white, according to the nature and peculiarities of the dye.
When he took out his handkerchief to wipe his face and the green of the
hat-lining and the purple stuff that had soaked through on to his neck
from the tie became thoroughly mixed, the effect was amazing.

Near Dhar the rain stopped and the evening sun came out and dried him up
slightly. It fixed the colors, too. Three miles from Pathankote the last
pony fell dead lame, and Golightly was forced to walk. He pushed on
into Pathankote to find his servants. He did not know then that his
khitmatgar had stopped by the roadside to get drunk, and would come on
the next day saying that he had sprained his ankle. When he got into
Pathankote, he couldn't find his servants, his boots were stiff and ropy
with mud, and there were large quantities of dirt about his body. The
blue tie had run as much as the khaki. So he took it off with the collar
and threw it away. Then he said something about servants generally and
tried to get a peg. He paid eight annas for the drink, and this revealed
to him that he had only six annas more in his pocket--or in the world as
he stood at that hour.

He went to the Station-Master to negotiate for a first-class ticket to
Khasa, where he was stationed. The booking-clerk said something to
the Station-Master, the Station-Master said something to the Telegraph
Clerk, and the three looked at him with curiosity. They asked him to
wait for half-an-hour, while they telegraphed to Umritsar for
authority. So he waited, and four constables came and grouped themselves
picturesquely round him. Just as he was preparing to ask them to go
away, the Station-Master said that he would give the Sahib a ticket
to Umritsar, if the Sahib would kindly come inside the booking-office.
Golightly stepped inside, and the next thing he knew was that a
constable was attached to each of his legs and arms, while the
Station-Master was trying to cram a mailbag over his head.

There was a very fair scuffle all round the booking-office, and
Golightly received a nasty cut over his eye through falling against
a table. But the constables were too much for him, and they and the
Station-Master handcuffed him securely. As soon as the mail-bag was
slipped, he began expressing his opinions, and the head-constable
said:--“Without doubt this is the soldier-Englishman we required. Listen
to the abuse!” Then Golightly asked the Station-Master what the this
and the that the proceedings meant. The Station-Master told him he was
“Private John Binkle of the ---- Regiment, 5 ft. 9 in., fair hair,
gray eyes, and a dissipated appearance, no marks on the body,” who had
deserted a fortnight ago. Golightly began explaining at great length;
and the more he explained the less the Station-Master believed him. He
said that no Lieutenant could look such a ruffian as did Golightly, and
that his instructions were to send his capture under proper escort to
Umritsar. Golightly was feeling very damp and uncomfortable, and the
language he used was not fit for publication, even in an expurgated
form. The four constables saw him safe to Umritsar in an “intermediate”
 compartment, and he spent the four-hour journey in abusing them as
fluently as his knowledge of the vernaculars allowed.

At Umritsar he was bundled out on the platform into the arms of a
Corporal and two men of the ---- Regiment. Golightly drew himself up
and tried to carry off matters jauntily. He did not feel too jaunty in
handcuffs, with four constables behind him, and the blood from the
cut on his forehead stiffening on his left cheek. The Corporal was not
jocular either. Golightly got as far as--“This is a very absurd mistake,
my men,” when the Corporal told him to “stow his lip” and come along.
Golightly did not want to come along. He desired to stop and explain.
He explained very well indeed, until the Corporal cut in with:--“YOU
a orficer! It's the like o' YOU as brings disgrace on the likes of US.
Bloom-in' fine orficer you are! I know your regiment. The Rogue's
March is the quickstep where you come from. You're a black shame to the
Service.”

Golightly kept his temper, and began explaining all over again from the
beginning. Then he was marched out of the rain into the refreshment-room
and told not to make a qualified fool of himself. The men were going to
run him up to Fort Govindghar. And “running up” is a performance almost
as undignified as the Frog March.

Golightly was nearly hysterical with rage and the chill and the mistake
and the handcuffs and the headache that the cut on his forehead had
given him. He really laid himself out to express what was in his mind.
When he had quite finished and his throat was feeling dry, one of the
men said:--“I've 'eard a few beggars in the click blind, stiff and crack
on a bit; but I've never 'eard any one to touch this 'ere 'orficer.'”
 They were not angry with him. They rather admired him. They had some
beer at the refreshment-room, and offered Golightly some too, because
he had “swore won'erful.” They asked him to tell them all about the
adventures of Private John Binkle while he was loose on the countryside;
and that made Golightly wilder than ever. If he had kept his wits about
him he would have kept quiet until an officer came; but he attempted to
run.

Now the butt of a Martini in the small of your back hurts a great deal,
and rotten, rain-soaked khaki tears easily when two men are jerking at
your collar.

Golightly rose from the floor feeling very sick and giddy, with his
shirt ripped open all down his breast and nearly all down his back. He
yielded to his luck, and at that point the down-train from Lahore came
in carrying one of Golightly's Majors.

This is the Major's evidence in full:--

“There was the sound of a scuffle in the second-class refreshment-room,
so I went in and saw the most villainous loafer that I ever set eyes on.
His boots and breeches were plastered with mud and beer-stains. He wore
a muddy-white dunghill sort of thing on his head, and it hung down in
slips on his shoulders, which were a good deal scratched. He was half in
and half out of a shirt as nearly in two pieces as it could be, and he
was begging the guard to look at the name on the tail of it. As he had
rucked the shirt all over his head, I couldn't at first see who he was,
but I fancied that he was a man in the first stage of D. T. from the way
he swore while he wrestled with his rags. When he turned round, and I
had made allowance for a lump as big as a pork-pie over one eye, and
some green war-paint on the face, and some violet stripes round the
neck, I saw that it was Golightly. He was very glad to see me,” said the
Major, “and he hoped I would not tell the Mess about it. I didn't, but
you can if you like, now that Golightly has gone Home.”

Golightly spent the greater part of that summer in trying to get the
Corporal and the two soldiers tried by Court-Martial for arresting an
“officer and a gentleman.” They were, of course, very sorry for their
error. But the tale leaked into the regimental canteen, and thence ran
about the Province.




THE HOUSE OF SUDDHOO


     A stone's throw out on either hand
     From that well-ordered road we tread,
       And all the world is wild and strange;
     Churel and ghoul and Djinn and sprite
     Shall bear us company to-night,
     For we have reached the Oldest Land
       Wherein the Powers of Darkness range.

                  From the Dusk to the Dawn.


The house of Suddhoo, near the Taksali Gate, is two-storied, with four
carved windows of old brown wood, and a flat roof. You may recognize
it by five red hand-prints arranged like the Five of Diamonds on the
whitewash between the upper windows. Bhagwan Dass, the bunnia, and a
man who says he gets his living by seal-cutting, live in the lower story
with a troop of wives, servants, friends, and retainers. The two upper
rooms used to be occupied by Janoo and Azizun and a little black-and-tan
terrier that was stolen from an Englishman's house and given to Janoo by
a soldier. To-day, only Janoo lives in the upper rooms. Suddhoo sleeps
on the roof generally, except when he sleeps in the street. He used
to go to Peshawar in the cold weather to visit his son, who sells
curiosities near the Edwardes' Gate, and then he slept under a real mud
roof. Suddhoo is a great friend of mine, because his cousin had a son
who secured, thanks to my recommendation, the post of head-messenger
to a big firm in the Station. Suddhoo says that God will make me a
Lieutenant-Governor one of these days. I daresay his prophecy will come
true. He is very, very old, with white hair and no teeth worth showing,
and he has outlived his wits--outlived nearly everything except his
fondness for his son at Peshawar. Janoo and Azizun are Kashmiris,
Ladies of the City, and theirs was an ancient and more or less honorable
profession; but Azizun has since married a medical student from the
North-West and has settled down to a most respectable life somewhere
near Bareilly. Bhagwan Dass is an extortionate and an adulterator. He
is very rich. The man who is supposed to get his living by seal-cutting
pretends to be very poor. This lets you know as much as is necessary of
the four principal tenants in the house of Suddhoo. Then there is Me,
of course; but I am only the chorus that comes in at the end to explain
things. So I do not count.

Suddhoo was not clever. The man who pretended to cut seals was the
cleverest of them all--Bhagwan Dass only knew how to lie--except Janoo.
She was also beautiful, but that was her own affair.

Suddhoo's son at Peshawar was attacked by pleurisy, and old Suddhoo
was troubled. The seal-cutter man heard of Suddhoo's anxiety and made
capital out of it. He was abreast of the times. He got a friend in
Peshawar to telegraph daily accounts of the son's health. And here the
story begins.

Suddhoo's cousin's son told me, one evening, that Suddhoo wanted to see
me; that he was too old and feeble to come personally, and that I should
be conferring an everlasting honor on the House of Suddhoo if I went to
him. I went; but I think, seeing how well-off Suddhoo was then, that he
might have sent something better than an ekka, which jolted fearfully,
to haul out a future Lieutenant-Governor to the City on a muggy April
evening. The ekka did not run quickly. It was full dark when we pulled
up opposite the door of Ranjit Singh's Tomb near the main gate of the
Fort. Here was Suddhoo and he said that, by reason of my condescension,
it was absolutely certain that I should become a Lieutenant-Governor
while my hair was yet black. Then we talked about the weather and the
state of my health, and the wheat crops, for fifteen minutes, in the
Huzuri Bagh, under the stars.

Suddhoo came to the point at last. He said that Janoo had told him that
there was an order of the Sirkar against magic, because it was feared
that magic might one day kill the Empress of India. I didn't know
anything about the state of the law; but I fancied that something
interesting was going to happen. I said that so far from magic being
discouraged by the Government it was highly commended. The greatest
officials of the State practiced it themselves. (If the Financial
Statement isn't magic, I don't know what is.) Then, to encourage him
further, I said that, if there was any jadoo afoot, I had not the least
objection to giving it my countenance and sanction, and to seeing that
it was clean jadoo--white magic, as distinguished from the unclean jadoo
which kills folk. It took a long time before Suddhoo admitted that this
was just what he had asked me to come for. Then he told me, in jerks
and quavers, that the man who said he cut seals was a sorcerer of the
cleanest kind; that every day he gave Suddhoo news of the sick son in
Peshawar more quickly than the lightning could fly, and that this
news was always corroborated by the letters. Further, that he had told
Suddhoo how a great danger was threatening his son, which could be
removed by clean jadoo; and, of course, heavy payment. I began to see
how the land lay, and told Suddhoo that I also understood a little jadoo
in the Western line, and would go to his house to see that everything
was done decently and in order. We set off together; and on the way
Suddhoo told me he had paid the seal-cutter between one hundred and
two hundred rupees already; and the jadoo of that night would cost two
hundred more. Which was cheap, he said, considering the greatness of his
son's danger; but I do not think he meant it.

The lights were all cloaked in the front of the house when we arrived. I
could hear awful noises from behind the seal-cutter's shop-front, as if
some one were groaning his soul out. Suddhoo shook all over, and while
we groped our way upstairs told me that the jadoo had begun. Janoo and
Azizun met us at the stair-head, and told us that the jadoo-work was
coming off in their rooms, because there was more space there. Janoo is
a lady of a freethinking turn of mind. She whispered that the jadoo was
an invention to get money out of Suddhoo, and that the seal-cutter would
go to a hot place when he died. Suddhoo was nearly crying with fear
and old age. He kept walking up and down the room in the half light,
repeating his son's name over and over again, and asking Azizun if
the seal-cutter ought not to make a reduction in the case of his own
landlord. Janoo pulled me over to the shadow in the recess of the carved
bow-windows. The boards were up, and the rooms were only lit by one tiny
lamp. There was no chance of my being seen if I stayed still.

Presently, the groans below ceased, and we heard steps on the staircase.
That was the seal-cutter. He stopped outside the door as the terrier
barked and Azizun fumbled at the chain, and he told Suddhoo to blow out
the lamp. This left the place in jet darkness, except for the red glow
from the two huqas that belonged to Janoo and Azizun. The seal-cutter
came in, and I heard Suddhoo throw himself down on the floor and groan.
Azizun caught her breath, and Janoo backed to one of the beds with a
shudder. There was a clink of something metallic, and then shot up a
pale blue-green flame near the ground. The light was just enough to show
Azizun, pressed against one corner of the room with the terrier between
her knees; Janoo, with her hands clasped, leaning forward as she sat on
the bed; Suddhoo, face down, quivering, and the seal-cutter.

I hope I may never see another man like that seal-cutter. He was
stripped to the waist, with a wreath of white jasmine as thick as my
wrist round his forehead, a salmon-colored loin-cloth round his middle,
and a steel bangle on each ankle. This was not awe-inspiring. It was
the face of the man that turned me cold. It was blue-gray in the first
place. In the second, the eyes were rolled back till you could only
see the whites of them; and, in the third, the face was the face of
a demon--a ghoul--anything you please except of the sleek, oily old
ruffian who sat in the day-time over his turning-lathe downstairs. He
was lying on his stomach, with his arms turned and crossed behind him,
as if he had been thrown down pinioned. His head and neck were the only
parts of him off the floor. They were nearly at right angles to the
body, like the head of a cobra at spring. It was ghastly. In the centre
of the room, on the bare earth floor, stood a big, deep, brass basin,
with a pale blue-green light floating in the centre like a night-light.
Round that basin the man on the floor wriggled himself three times. How
he did it I do not know. I could see the muscles ripple along his spine
and fall smooth again; but I could not see any other motion. The head
seemed the only thing alive about him, except that slow curl and uncurl
of the laboring back-muscles. Janoo from the bed was breathing seventy
to the minute; Azizun held her hands before her eyes; and old Suddhoo,
fingering at the dirt that had got into his white beard, was crying to
himself. The horror of it was that the creeping, crawly thing made no
sound--only crawled! And, remember, this lasted for ten minutes, while
the terrier whined, and Azizun shuddered, and Janoo gasped, and Suddhoo
cried.

I felt the hair lift at the back of my head, and my heart thump like a
thermantidote paddle. Luckily, the seal-cutter betrayed himself by his
most impressive trick and made me calm again. After he had finished that
unspeakable triple crawl, he stretched his head away from the floor as
high as he could, and sent out a jet of fire from his nostrils. Now, I
knew how fire-spouting is done--I can do it myself--so I felt at ease.
The business was a fraud. If he had only kept to that crawl without
trying to raise the effect, goodness knows what I might not have
thought. Both the girls shrieked at the jet of fire and the head
dropped, chin down, on the floor with a thud; the whole body lying then
like a corpse with its arms trussed. There was a pause of five full
minutes after this, and the blue-green flame died down. Janoo stooped to
settle one of her anklets, while Azizun turned her face to the wall and
took the terrier in her arms. Suddhoo put out an arm mechanically to
Janoo's huqa, and she slid it across the floor with her foot. Directly
above the body and on the wall, were a couple of flaming portraits, in
stamped paper frames, of the Queen and the Prince of Wales. They looked
down on the performance, and, to my thinking, seemed to heighten the
grotesqueness of it all.

Just when the silence was getting unendurable, the body turned over and
rolled away from the basin to the side of the room, where it lay stomach
up. There was a faint “plop” from the basin--exactly like the noise
a fish makes when it takes a fly--and the green light in the centre
revived.

I looked at the basin, and saw, bobbing in the water, the dried,
shrivelled, black head of a native baby--open eyes, open mouth and
shaved scalp. It was worse, being so very sudden, than the crawling
exhibition. We had no time to say anything before it began to speak.

Read Poe's account of the voice that came from the mesmerized dying man,
and you will realize less than one-half of the horror of that head's
voice.

There was an interval of a second or two between each word, and a sort
of “ring, ring, ring,” in the note of the voice, like the timbre of a
bell. It pealed slowly, as if talking to itself, for several minutes
before I got rid of my cold sweat. Then the blessed solution struck me.
I looked at the body lying near the doorway, and saw, just where the
hollow of the throat joins on the shoulders, a muscle that had nothing
to do with any man's regular breathing, twitching away steadily. The
whole thing was a careful reproduction of the Egyptian teraphin that
one read about sometimes and the voice was as clever and as appalling a
piece of ventriloquism as one could wish to hear. All this time the head
was “lip-lip-lapping” against the side of the basin, and speaking. It
told Suddhoo, on his face again whining, of his son's illness and of
the state of the illness up to the evening of that very night. I always
shall respect the seal-cutter for keeping so faithfully to the time
of the Peshawar telegrams. It went on to say that skilled doctors were
night and day watching over the man's life; and that he would eventually
recover if the fee to the potent sorcerer, whose servant was the head in
the basin, were doubled.

Here the mistake from the artistic point of view came in. To ask for
twice your stipulated fee in a voice that Lazarus might have used
when he rose from the dead, is absurd. Janoo, who is really a woman of
masculine intellect, saw this as quickly as I did. I heard her say “Asli
nahin! Fareib!” scornfully under her breath; and just as she said so,
the light in the basin died out, the head stopped talking, and we heard
the room door creak on its hinges. Then Janoo struck a match, lit the
lamp, and we saw that head, basin, and seal-cutter were gone. Suddhoo
was wringing his hands and explaining to any one who cared to listen,
that, if his chances of eternal salvation depended on it, he could not
raise another two hundred rupees. Azizun was nearly in hysterics in the
corner; while Janoo sat down composedly on one of the beds to discuss
the probabilities of the whole thing being a bunao, or “make-up.”

I explained as much as I knew of the seal-cutter's way of jadoo; but
her argument was much more simple:--“The magic that is always demanding
gifts is no true magic,” said she. “My mother told me that the
only potent love-spells are those which are told you for love. This
seal-cutter man is a liar and a devil. I dare not tell, do anything, or
get anything done, because I am in debt to Bhagwan Dass the bunnia for
two gold rings and a heavy anklet. I must get my food from his shop. The
seal-cutter is the friend of Bhagwan Dass, and he would poison my food.
A fool's jadoo has been going on for ten days, and has cost Suddhoo
many rupees each night. The seal-cutter used black hens and lemons and
mantras before. He never showed us anything like this till to-night.
Azizun is a fool, and will be a pur dahnashin soon. Suddhoo has lost
his strength and his wits. See now! I had hoped to get from Suddhoo many
rupees while he lived, and many more after his death; and behold, he
is spending everything on that offspring of a devil and a she-ass, the
seal-cutter!”

Here I said:--“But what induced Suddhoo to drag me into the business?
Of course I can speak to the seal-cutter, and he shall refund. The whole
thing is child's talk--shame--and senseless.”

“Suddhoo IS an old child,” said Janoo. “He has lived on the roofs these
seventy years and is as senseless as a milch-goat. He brought you here
to assure himself that he was not breaking any law of the Sirkar, whose
salt he ate many years ago. He worships the dust off the feet of the
seal-cutter, and that cow-devourer has forbidden him to go and see his
son. What does Suddhoo know of your laws or the lightning-post? I have
to watch his money going day by day to that lying beast below.”

Janoo stamped her foot on the floor and nearly cried with vexation;
while Suddhoo was whimpering under a blanket in the corner, and Azizun
was trying to guide the pipe-stem to his foolish old mouth.

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

Now the case stands thus. Unthinkingly, I have laid myself open to the
charge of aiding and abetting the seal-cutter in obtaining money under
false pretences, which is forbidden by Section 420 of the Indian Penal
Code. I am helpless in the matter for these reasons, I cannot inform
the Police. What witnesses would support my statements? Janoo refuses
flatly, Azizun is a veiled woman somewhere near Bareilly--lost in this
big India of ours. I cannot again take the law into my own hands, and
speak to the seal-cutter; for certain am I that, not only would Suddhoo
disbelieve me, but this step would end in the poisoning of Janoo, who is
bound hand and foot by her debt to the bunnia. Suddhoo is an old dotard;
and whenever we meet mumbles my idiotic joke that the Sirkar rather
patronizes the Black Art than otherwise. His son is well now; but
Suddhoo is completely under the influence of the seal-cutter, by whose
advice he regulates the affairs of his life. Janoo watches daily the
money that she hoped to wheedle out of Suddhoo taken by the seal-cutter,
and becomes daily more furious and sullen.

She will never tell, because she dare not; but, unless something
happens to prevent her, I am afraid that the seal-cutter will die of
cholera--the white arsenic kind--about the middle of May. And thus I
shall have to be privy to a murder in the House of Suddhoo.




HIS WEDDED WIFE.


     Cry “Murder!” in the market-place, and each
     Will turn upon his neighbor anxious eyes
     That ask:--“Art thou the man?”  We hunted Cain,
     Some centuries ago, across the world,
     That bred the fear our own misdeeds maintain
     To-day.

                              Vibart's Moralities.


Shakespeare says something about worms, or it may be giants or beetles,
turning if you tread on them too severely. The safest plan is never to
tread on a worm--not even on the last new subaltern from Home, with his
buttons hardly out of their tissue paper, and the red of sappy English
beef in his cheeks. This is the story of the worm that turned. For
the sake of brevity, we will call Henry Augustus Ramsay Faizanne, “The
Worm,” although he really was an exceedingly pretty boy, without a hair
on his face, and with a waist like a girl's when he came out to the
Second “Shikarris” and was made unhappy in several ways. The “Shikarris”
 are a high-caste regiment, and you must be able to do things well--play
a banjo or ride more than a little, or sing, or act--to get on with
them.

The Worm did nothing except fall off his pony, and knock chips out of
gate-posts with his trap. Even that became monotonous after a time. He
objected to whist, cut the cloth at billiards, sang out of tune, kept
very much to himself, and wrote to his Mamma and sisters at Home. Four
of these five things were vices which the “Shikarris” objected to and
set themselves to eradicate. Every one knows how subalterns are, by
brother subalterns, softened and not permitted to be ferocious. It is
good and wholesome, and does no one any harm, unless tempers are lost;
and then there is trouble. There was a man once--but that is another
story.

The “Shikarris” shikarred The Worm very much, and he bore everything
without winking. He was so good and so anxious to learn, and flushed
so pink, that his education was cut short, and he was left to his own
devices by every one except the Senior Subaltern, who continued to make
life a burden to The Worm. The Senior Subaltern meant no harm; but his
chaff was coarse, and he didn't quite understand where to stop. He had
been waiting too long for his company; and that always sours a man. Also
he was in love, which made him worse.

One day, after he had borrowed The Worm's trap for a lady who never
existed, had used it himself all the afternoon, had sent a note to The
Worm purporting to come from the lady, and was telling the Mess all
about it, The Worm rose in his place and said, in his quiet, ladylike
voice: “That was a very pretty sell; but I'll lay you a month's pay to
a month's pay when you get your step, that I work a sell on you that
you'll remember for the rest of your days, and the Regiment after you
when you're dead or broke.” The Worm wasn't angry in the least, and the
rest of the Mess shouted. Then the Senior Subaltern looked at The Worm
from the boots upwards, and down again, and said, “Done, Baby.” The Worm
took the rest of the Mess to witness that the bet had been taken, and
retired into a book with a sweet smile.

Two months passed, and the Senior Subaltern still educated The Worm,
who began to move about a little more as the hot weather came on. I have
said that the Senior Subaltern was in love. The curious thing is that
a girl was in love with the Senior Subaltern. Though the Colonel said
awful things, and the Majors snorted, and married Captains looked
unutterable wisdom, and the juniors scoffed, those two were engaged.

The Senior Subaltern was so pleased with getting his Company and his
acceptance at the same time that he forgot to bother The Worm. The girl
was a pretty girl, and had money of her own. She does not come into this
story at all.

One night, at the beginning of the hot weather, all the Mess, except The
Worm, who had gone to his own room to write Home letters, were sitting
on the platform outside the Mess House. The Band had finished playing,
but no one wanted to go in. And the Captains' wives were there also.
The folly of a man in love is unlimited. The Senior Subaltern had been
holding forth on the merits of the girl he was engaged to, and the
ladies were purring approval, while the men yawned, when there was a
rustle of skirts in the dark, and a tired, faint voice lifted itself:

“Where's my husband?”

I do not wish in the least to reflect on the morality of the
“Shikarris;” but it is on record that four men jumped up as if they had
been shot. Three of them were married men. Perhaps they were afraid that
their wives had come from Home unbeknownst. The fourth said that he had
acted on the impulse of the moment. He explained this afterwards.

Then the voice cried:--“Oh, Lionel!” Lionel was the Senior Subaltern's
name. A woman came into the little circle of light by the candles on
the peg-tables, stretching out her hands to the dark where the Senior
Subaltern was, and sobbing. We rose to our feet, feeling that things
were going to happen and ready to believe the worst. In this bad, small
world of ours, one knows so little of the life of the next man--which,
after all, is entirely his own concern--that one is not surprised when
a crash comes. Anything might turn up any day for any one. Perhaps the
Senior Subaltern had been trapped in his youth. Men are crippled that
way occasionally. We didn't know; we wanted to hear; and the Captains'
wives were as anxious as we. If he HAD been trapped, he was to be
excused; for the woman from nowhere, in the dusty shoes, and gray
travelling dress, was very lovely, with black hair and great eyes full
of tears. She was tall, with a fine figure, and her voice had a running
sob in it pitiful to hear. As soon as the Senior Subaltern stood up, she
threw her arms round his neck, and called him “my darling,” and said she
could not bear waiting alone in England, and his letters were so short
and cold, and she was his to the end of the world, and would he forgive
her. This did not sound quite like a lady's way of speaking. It was too
demonstrative.

Things seemed black indeed, and the Captains' wives peered under their
eyebrows at the Senior Subaltern, and the Colonel's face set like the
Day of Judgment framed in gray bristles, and no one spoke for a while.

Next the Colonel said, very shortly:--“Well, Sir?” and the woman sobbed
afresh. The Senior Subaltern was half choked with the arms round his
neck, but he gasped out:--“It's a d----d lie! I never had a wife in my
life!” “Don't swear,” said the Colonel. “Come into the Mess. We must
sift this clear somehow,” and he sighed to himself, for he believed in
his “Shikarris,” did the Colonel.

We trooped into the ante-room, under the full lights, and there we
saw how beautiful the woman was. She stood up in the middle of us all,
sometimes choking with crying, then hard and proud, and then holding
out her arms to the Senior Subaltern. It was like the fourth act of a
tragedy. She told us how the Senior Subaltern had married her when he
was Home on leave eighteen months before; and she seemed to know all
that we knew, and more too, of his people and his past life. He was
white and ashy gray, trying now and again to break into the torrent
of her words; and we, noting how lovely she was and what a criminal he
looked, esteemed him a beast of the worst kind. We felt sorry for him,
though.

I shall never forget the indictment of the Senior Subaltern by his wife.
Nor will he. It was so sudden, rushing out of the dark, unannounced,
into our dull lives. The Captains' wives stood back; but their eyes were
alight, and you could see that they had already convicted and sentenced
the Senior Subaltern. The Colonel seemed five years older. One Major was
shading his eyes with his hand and watching the woman from underneath
it. Another was chewing his moustache and smiling quietly as if he
were witnessing a play. Full in the open space in the centre, by the
whist-tables, the Senior Subaltern's terrier was hunting for fleas. I
remember all this as clearly as though a photograph were in my hand.
I remember the look of horror on the Senior Subaltern's face. It was
rather like seeing a man hanged; but much more interesting. Finally, the
woman wound up by saying that the Senior Subaltern carried a double F.
M. in tattoo on his left shoulder. We all knew that, and to our innocent
minds it seemed to clinch the matter. But one of the Bachelor Majors
said very politely:--“I presume that your marriage certificate would be
more to the purpose?”

That roused the woman. She stood up and sneered at the Senior Subaltern
for a cur, and abused the Major and the Colonel and all the rest.
Then she wept, and then she pulled a paper from her breast, saying
imperially:--“Take that! And let my husband--my lawfully wedded
husband--read it aloud--if he dare!”

There was a hush, and the men looked into each other's eyes as the
Senior Subaltern came forward in a dazed and dizzy way, and took the
paper. We were wondering as we stared, whether there was anything
against any one of us that might turn up later on. The Senior
Subaltern's throat was dry; but, as he ran his eye over the paper, he
broke out into a hoarse cackle of relief, and said to the woman:--“You
young blackguard!”

But the woman had fled through a door, and on the paper was
written:--“This is to certify that I, The Worm, have paid in full my
debts to the Senior Subaltern, and, further, that the Senior Subaltern
is my debtor, by agreement on the 23d of February, as by the Mess
attested, to the extent of one month's Captain's pay, in the lawful
currency of the India Empire.”

Then a deputation set off for The Worm's quarters and found him, betwixt
and between, unlacing his stays, with the hat, wig, serge dress, etc.,
on the bed. He came over as he was, and the “Shikarris” shouted till the
Gunners' Mess sent over to know if they might have a share of the fun. I
think we were all, except the Colonel and the Senior Subaltern, a little
disappointed that the scandal had come to nothing. But that is human
nature. There could be no two words about The Worm's acting. It leaned
as near to a nasty tragedy as anything this side of a joke can. When
most of the Subalterns sat upon him with sofa-cushions to find out
why he had not said that acting was his strong point, he answered very
quietly:--“I don't think you ever asked me. I used to act at Home with
my sisters.” But no acting with girls could account for The Worm's
display that night. Personally, I think it was in bad taste. Besides
being dangerous. There is no sort of use in playing with fire, even for
fun.

The “Shikarris” made him President of the Regimental Dramatic Club; and,
when the Senior Subaltern paid up his debt, which he did at once, The
Worm sank the money in scenery and dresses. He was a good Worm; and
the “Shikarris” are proud of him. The only drawback is that he has been
christened “Mrs. Senior Subaltern;” and as there are now two Mrs. Senior
Subalterns in the Station, this is sometimes confusing to strangers.

Later on, I will tell you of a case something like, this, but with all
the jest left out and nothing in it but real trouble.




THE BROKEN LINK HANDICAPPED.


     While the snaffle holds, or the “long-neck” stings,
     While the big beam tilts, or the last bell rings,
     While horses are horses to train and to race,
     Then women and wine take a second place
             For me--for me--
               While a short “ten-three”
      Has a field to squander or fence to face!

                                    Song of the G. R.


There are more ways of running a horse to suit your book than pulling
his head off in the straight. Some men forget this. Understand clearly
that all racing is rotten--as everything connected with losing money
must be. Out here, in addition to its inherent rottenness, it has the
merit of being two-thirds sham; looking pretty on paper only. Every one
knows every one else far too well for business purposes. How on earth
can you rack and harry and post a man for his losings, when you are fond
of his wife, and live in the same Station with him? He says, “on the
Monday following, I can't settle just yet.” You say, “All right, old
man,” and think your self lucky if you pull off nine hundred out of
a two-thousand rupee debt. Any way you look at it, Indian racing is
immoral, and expensively immoral. Which is much worse. If a man wants
your money, he ought to ask for it, or send round a subscription-list,
instead of juggling about the country, with an Australian larrikin;
a “brumby,” with as much breed as the boy; a brace of chumars in
gold-laced caps; three or four ekka-ponies with hogged manes, and a
switch-tailed demirep of a mare called Arab because she has a kink in
her flag. Racing leads to the shroff quicker than anything else. But
if you have no conscience and no sentiments, and good hands, and some
knowledge of pace, and ten years' experience of horses, and several
thousand rupees a month, I believe that you can occasionally contrive to
pay your shoeing-bills.

Did you ever know Shackles--b. w. g., 15.13.8--coarse, loose, mule-like
ears--barrel as long as a gate-post--tough as a telegraph-wire--and the
queerest brute that ever looked through a bridle? He was of no brand,
being one of an ear-nicked mob taken into the Bucephalus at 4l.-10s. a
head to make up freight, and sold raw and out of condition at Calcutta
for Rs. 275. People who lost money on him called him a “brumby;” but if
ever any horse had Harpoon's shoulders and The Gin's temper, Shackles
was that horse. Two miles was his own particular distance. He trained
himself, ran himself, and rode himself; and, if his jockey insulted
him by giving him hints, he shut up at once and bucked the boy off. He
objected to dictation. Two or three of his owners did not understand
this, and lost money in consequence. At last he was bought by a man who
discovered that, if a race was to be won, Shackles, and Shackles only,
would win it in his own way, so long as his jockey sat still. This man
had a riding-boy called Brunt--a lad from Perth, West Australia--and
he taught Brunt, with a trainer's whip, the hardest thing a jock can
learn--to sit still, to sit still, and to keep on sitting still. When
Brunt fairly grasped this truth, Shackles devastated the country. No
weight could stop him at his own distance; and the fame of Shackles
spread from Ajmir in the South, to Chedputter in the North. There was no
horse like Shackles, so long as he was allowed to do his work in his own
way. But he was beaten in the end; and the story of his fall is enough
to make angels weep.

At the lower end of the Chedputter racecourse, just before the turn into
the straight, the track passes close to a couple of old brick-mounds
enclosing a funnel-shaped hollow. The big end of the funnel is not six
feet from the railings on the off-side. The astounding peculiarity of
the course is that, if you stand at one particular place, about half a
mile away, inside the course, and speak at an ordinary pitch, your voice
just hits the funnel of the brick-mounds and makes a curious whining
echo there. A man discovered this one morning by accident while out
training with a friend. He marked the place to stand and speak from
with a couple of bricks, and he kept his knowledge to himself. EVERY
peculiarity of a course is worth remembering in a country where rats
play the mischief with the elephant-litter, and Stewards build jumps
to suit their own stables. This man ran a very fairish country-bred, a
long, racking high mare with the temper of a fiend, and the paces of
an airy wandering seraph--a drifty, glidy stretch. The mare was, as a
delicate tribute to Mrs. Reiver, called “The Lady Regula Baddun”--or for
short, Regula Baddun.

Shackles' jockey, Brunt, was a quiet, well-behaved boy, but his nerves
had been shaken. He began his career by riding jump-races in Melbourne,
where a few Stewards want lynching, and was one of the jockeys who
came through the awful butchery--perhaps you will recollect it--of the
Maribyrnong Plate. The walls were colonial ramparts--logs of jarrak
spiked into masonry--with wings as strong as Church buttresses. Once
in his stride, a horse had to jump or fall. He couldn't run out. In the
Maribyrnong Plate, twelve horses were jammed at the second wall. Red
Hat, leading, fell this side, and threw out The Glen, and the ruck
came up behind and the space between wing and wing was one struggling,
screaming, kicking shambles. Four jockeys were taken out dead; three
were very badly hurt, and Brunt was among the three. He told the story
of the Maribyrnong Plate sometimes; and when he described how Whalley
on Red Hat, said, as the mare fell under him:--“God ha' mercy, I'm done
for!” and how, next instant, Sithee There and White Otter had crushed
the life out of poor Whalley, and the dust hid a small hell of men and
horses, no one marvelled that Brunt had dropped jump-races and Australia
together. Regula Baddun's owner knew that story by heart. Brunt never
varied it in the telling. He had no education.

Shackles came to the Chedputter Autumn races one year, and his owner
walked about insulting the sportsmen of Chedputter generally, till
they went to the Honorary Secretary in a body and said:--“Appoint
Handicappers, and arrange a race which shall break Shackles and humble
the pride of his owner.” The Districts rose against Shackles and sent
up of their best; Ousel, who was supposed to be able to do his mile in
1-53; Petard, the stud-bred, trained by a cavalry regiment who knew how
to train; Gringalet, the ewe-lamb of the 75th; Bobolink, the pride of
Peshawar; and many others.

They called that race The Broken-Link Handicap, because it was to smash
Shackles; and the Handicappers piled on the weights, and the Fund gave
eight hundred rupees, and the distance was “round the course for all
horses.” Shackles' owner said:--“You can arrange the race with regard
to Shackles only. So long as you don't bury him under weight-cloths,
I don't mind.” Regula Baddun's owner said:--“I throw in my mare to fret
Ousel. Six furlongs is Regula's distance, and she will then lie down
and die. So also will Ousel, for his jockey doesn't understand a waiting
race.” Now, this was a lie, for Regula had been in work for two months
at Dehra, and her chances were good, always supposing that Shackles
broke a blood-vessel--OR BRUNT MOVED ON HIM.

The plunging in the lotteries was fine. They filled eight thousand-rupee
lotteries on the Broken Link Handicap, and the account in the Pioneer
said that “favoritism was divided.” In plain English, the various
contingents were wild on their respective horses; for the Handicappers
had done their work well. The Honorary Secretary shouted himself hoarse
through the din; and the smoke of the cheroots was like the smoke, and
the rattling of the dice-boxes like the rattle of small-arm fire.

Ten horses started--very level--and Regula Baddun's owner cantered out
on his back to a place inside the circle of the course, where two bricks
had been thrown. He faced towards the brick-mounds at the lower end of
the course and waited.

The story of the running is in the Pioneer. At the end of the first
mile, Shackles crept out of the ruck, well on the outside, ready to get
round the turn, lay hold of the bit and spin up the straight before the
others knew he had got away. Brunt was sitting still, perfectly happy,
listening to the “drum, drum, drum” of the hoofs behind, and knowing
that, in about twenty strides, Shackles would draw one deep breath and
go up the last half-mile like the “Flying Dutchman.” As Shackles went
short to take the turn and came abreast of the brick-mound, Brunt heard,
above the noise of the wind in his ears, a whining, wailing voice on the
offside, saying:--“God ha' mercy, I'm done for!” In one stride, Brunt
saw the whole seething smash of the Maribyrnong Plate before him,
started in his saddle and gave a yell of terror. The start brought the
heels into Shackles' side, and the scream hurt Shackles' feelings. He
couldn't stop dead; but he put out his feet and slid along for fifty
yards, and then, very gravely and judicially, bucked off Brunt--a
shaking, terror-stricken lump, while Regula Baddun made a neck-and-neck
race with Bobolink up the straight, and won by a short head--Petard
a bad third. Shackles' owner, in the Stand, tried to think that his
field-glasses had gone wrong. Regula Baddun's owner, waiting by the two
bricks, gave one deep sigh of relief, and cantered back to the stand. He
had won, in lotteries and bets, about fifteen thousand.

It was a broken-link Handicap with a vengeance. It broke nearly all the
men concerned, and nearly broke the heart of Shackles' owner. He went
down to interview Brunt. The boy lay, livid and gasping with fright,
where he had tumbled off. The sin of losing the race never seemed to
strike him. All he knew was that Whalley had “called” him, that the
“call” was a warning; and, were he cut in two for it, he would never get
up again. His nerve had gone altogether, and he only asked his master
to give him a good thrashing, and let him go. He was fit for nothing, he
said. He got his dismissal, and crept up to the paddock, white as chalk,
with blue lips, his knees giving way under him. People said nasty things
in the paddock; but Brunt never heeded. He changed into tweeds, took his
stick and went down the road, still shaking with fright, and muttering
over and over again:--“God ha' mercy, I'm done for!” To the best of my
knowledge and belief he spoke the truth.

So now you know how the Broken-Link Handicap was run and won. Of course
you don't believe it. You would credit anything about Russia's designs
on India, or the recommendations of the Currency Commission; but a
little bit of sober fact is more than you can stand!




BEYOND THE PALE.


  “Love heeds not caste nor sleep a broken bed.  I went in search of
  love and lost myself.”

                                                    Hindu Proverb.


A man should, whatever happens, keep to his own caste, race and breed.
Let the White go to the White and the Black to the Black. Then, whatever
trouble falls is in the ordinary course of things--neither sudden,
alien, nor unexpected.

This is the story of a man who wilfully stepped beyond the safe limits
of decent every-day society, and paid for it heavily.

He knew too much in the first instance; and he saw too much in the
second. He took too deep an interest in native life; but he will never
do so again.

Deep away in the heart of the City, behind Jitha Megji's bustee, lies
Amir Nath's Gully, which ends in a dead-wall pierced by one grated
window. At the head of the Gully is a big cow-byre, and the walls on
either side of the Gully are without windows. Neither Suchet Singh nor
Gaur Chand approved of their women-folk looking into the world. If
Durga Charan had been of their opinion, he would have been a happier man
to-day, and little Biessa would have been able to knead her own bread.
Her room looked out through the grated window into the narrow dark Gully
where the sun never came and where the buffaloes wallowed in the blue
slime. She was a widow, about fifteen years old, and she prayed the
Gods, day and night, to send her a lover; for she did not approve of
living alone.

One day the man--Trejago his name was--came into Amir Nath's Gully on an
aimless wandering; and, after he had passed the buffaloes, stumbled over
a big heap of cattle food.

Then he saw that the Gully ended in a trap, and heard a little laugh
from behind the grated window. It was a pretty little laugh, and
Trejago, knowing that, for all practical purposes, the old Arabian
Nights are good guides, went forward to the window, and whispered that
verse of “The Love Song of Har Dyal” which begins:


  Can a man stand upright in the face of the naked Sun;
      or a Lover in the Presence of his Beloved?
  If my feet fail me, O Heart of my Heart, am I to blame,
      being blinded by the glimpse of your beauty?


There came the faint tchinks of a woman's bracelets from behind the
grating, and a little voice went on with the song at the fifth verse:


  Alas! alas! Can the Moon tell the Lotus of her love when the
    Gate of Heaven is shut and the clouds gather for the rains?
  They have taken my Beloved, and driven her with the pack-horses
      to the North.
  There are iron chains on the feet that were set on my heart.
  Call to the bowman to make ready--


The voice stopped suddenly, and Trejago walked out of Amir Nath's Gully,
wondering who in the world could have capped “The Love Song of Har Dyal”
 so neatly.

Next morning, as he was driving to the office, an old woman threw a
packet into his dog-cart. In the packet was the half of a broken
glass bangle, one flower of the blood red dhak, a pinch of bhusa or
cattle-food, and eleven cardamoms. That packet was a letter--not a
clumsy compromising letter, but an innocent, unintelligible lover's
epistle.

Trejago knew far too much about these things, as I have said. No
Englishman should be able to translate object-letters. But Trejago
spread all the trifles on the lid of his office-box and began to puzzle
them out.

A broken glass-bangle stands for a Hindu widow all India over; because,
when her husband dies a woman's bracelets are broken on her wrists.
Trejago saw the meaning of the little bit of the glass. The flower
of the dhak means diversely “desire,” “come,” “write,” or “danger,”
 according to the other things with it. One cardamom means “jealousy;”
 but when any article is duplicated in an object-letter, it loses its
symbolic meaning and stands merely for one of a number indicating time,
or, if incense, curds, or saffron be sent also, place. The message ran
then:--“A widow dhak flower and bhusa--at eleven o'clock.” The pinch of
bhusa enlightened Trejago. He saw--this kind of letter leaves much
to instinctive knowledge--that the bhusa referred to the big heap of
cattle-food over which he had fallen in Amir Nath's Gully, and that the
message must come from the person behind the grating; she being a widow.
So the message ran then:--“A widow, in the Gully in which is the heap of
bhusa, desires you to come at eleven o'clock.”

Trejago threw all the rubbish into the fireplace and laughed. He knew
that men in the East do not make love under windows at eleven in the
forenoon, nor do women fix appointments a week in advance. So he went,
that very night at eleven, into Amir Nath's Gully, clad in a boorka,
which cloaks a man as well as a woman. Directly the gongs in the City
made the hour, the little voice behind the grating took up “The Love
Song of Har Dyal” at the verse where the Panthan girl calls upon Har
Dyal to return. The song is really pretty in the Vernacular. In English
you miss the wail of it. It runs something like this:--


     Alone upon the housetops, to the North
       I turn and watch the lightning in the sky,--
     The glamour of thy footsteps in the North,
       Come back to me, Beloved, or I die!

     Below my feet the still bazar is laid
       Far, far below the weary camels lie,--
     The camels and the captives of thy raid,
       Come back to me, Beloved, or I die!

     My father's wife is old and harsh with years,
       And drudge of all my father's house am I.--
     My bread is sorrow and my drink is tears,
       Come back to me, Beloved, or I die!


As the song stopped, Trejago stepped up under the grating and
whispered:--“I am here.”

Bisesa was good to look upon.

That night was the beginning of many strange things, and of a double
life so wild that Trejago to-day sometimes wonders if it were not all a
dream. Bisesa or her old handmaiden who had thrown the object-letter had
detached the heavy grating from the brick-work of the wall; so that the
window slid inside, leaving only a square of raw masonry, into which an
active man might climb.

In the day-time, Trejago drove through his routine of office-work, or
put on his calling-clothes and called on the ladies of the Station;
wondering how long they would know him if they knew of poor little
Bisesa. At night, when all the City was still, came the walk under the
evil-smelling boorka, the patrol through Jitha Megji's bustee, the quick
turn into Amir Nath's Gully between the sleeping cattle and the dead
walls, and then, last of all, Bisesa, and the deep, even breathing of
the old woman who slept outside the door of the bare little room that
Durga Charan allotted to his sister's daughter. Who or what Durga Charan
was, Trejago never inquired; and why in the world he was not discovered
and knifed never occurred to him till his madness was over, and
Bisesa... But this comes later.

Bisesa was an endless delight to Trejago. She was as ignorant as a bird;
and her distorted versions of the rumors from the outside world that had
reached her in her room, amused Trejago almost as much as her lisping
attempts to pronounce his name--“Christopher.” The first syllable was
always more than she could manage, and she made funny little gestures
with her rose-leaf hands, as one throwing the name away, and then,
kneeling before Trejago, asked him, exactly as an Englishwoman would do,
if he were sure he loved her. Trejago swore that he loved her more than
any one else in the world. Which was true.

After a month of this folly, the exigencies of his other life compelled
Trejago to be especially attentive to a lady of his acquaintance. You
may take it for a fact that anything of this kind is not only noticed
and discussed by a man's own race, but by some hundred and fifty natives
as well. Trejago had to walk with this lady and talk to her at the
Band-stand, and once or twice to drive with her; never for an instant
dreaming that this would affect his dearer out-of-the-way life. But the
news flew, in the usual mysterious fashion, from mouth to mouth, till
Bisesa's duenna heard of it and told Bisesa. The child was so troubled
that she did the household work evilly, and was beaten by Durga Charan's
wife in consequence.

A week later, Bisesa taxed Trejago with the flirtation. She understood
no gradations and spoke openly. Trejago laughed and Bisesa stamped her
little feet--little feet, light as marigold flowers, that could lie in
the palm of a man's one hand.

Much that is written about “Oriental passion and impulsiveness” is
exaggerated and compiled at second-hand, but a little of it is true; and
when an Englishman finds that little, it is quite as startling as any
passion in his own proper life. Bisesa raged and stormed, and finally
threatened to kill herself if Trejago did not at once drop the alien
Memsahib who had come between them. Trejago tried to explain, and
to show her that she did not understand these things from a Western
standpoint. Bisesa drew herself up, and said simply:

“I do not. I know only this--it is not good that I should have made you
dearer than my own heart to me, Sahib. You are an Englishman. I am only
a black girl”--she was fairer than bar-gold in the Mint--“and the widow
of a black man.”

Then she sobbed and said: “But on my soul and my Mother's soul, I love
you. There shall no harm come to you, whatever happens to me.”

Trejago argued with the child, and tried to soothe her, but she seemed
quite unreasonably disturbed. Nothing would satisfy her save that all
relations between them should end. He was to go away at once. And he
went. As he dropped out at the window, she kissed his forehead twice,
and he walked away wondering.

A week, and then three weeks, passed without a sign from Bisesa.
Trejago, thinking that the rupture had lasted quite long enough, went
down to Amir Nath's Gully for the fifth time in the three weeks, hoping
that his rap at the sill of the shifting grating would be answered. He
was not disappointed.

There was a young moon, and one stream of light fell down into Amir
Nath's Gully, and struck the grating, which was drawn away as he
knocked. From the black dark, Bisesa held out her arms into the
moonlight. Both hands had been cut off at the wrists, and the stumps
were nearly healed.

Then, as Bisesa bowed her head between her arms and sobbed, some one in
the room grunted like a wild beast, and something sharp--knife, sword or
spear--thrust at Trejago in his boorka. The stroke missed his body, but
cut into one of the muscles of the groin, and he limped slightly from
the wound for the rest of his days.

The grating went into its place. There was no sign whatever from inside
the house--nothing but the moonlight strip on the high wall, and the
blackness of Amir Nath's Gully behind.

The next thing Trejago remembers, after raging and shouting like a
madman between those pitiless walls, is that he found himself near the
river as the dawn was breaking, threw away his boorka and went home
bareheaded.

What the tragedy was--whether Bisesa had, in a fit of causeless despair,
told everything, or the intrigue had been discovered and she tortured
to tell, whether Durga Charan knew his name, and what became of
Bisesa--Trejago does not know to this day. Something horrible had
happened, and the thought of what it must have been comes upon Trejago
in the night now and again, and keeps him company till the morning.
One special feature of the case is that he does not know where lies the
front of Durga Charan's house. It may open on to a courtyard common to
two or more houses, or it may lie behind any one of the gates of Jitha
Megji's bustee. Trejago cannot tell. He cannot get Bisesa--poor little
Bisesa--back again. He has lost her in the City, where each man's house
is as guarded and as unknowable as the grave; and the grating that opens
into Amir Nath's Gully has been walled up.

But Trejago pays his calls regularly, and is reckoned a very decent sort
of man.

There is nothing peculiar about him, except a slight stiffness, caused
by a riding-strain, in the right leg.




IN ERROR.


     They burnt a corpse upon the sand--
         The light shone out afar;
       It guided home the plunging boats
         That beat from Zanzibar.
       Spirit of Fire, where'er Thy altars rise.
         Thou art Light of Guidance to our eyes!

                             Salsette Boat-Song.


There is hope for a man who gets publicly and riotously drunk more
often that he ought to do; but there is no hope for the man who drinks
secretly and alone in his own house--the man who is never seen to drink.

This is a rule; so there must be an exception to prove it. Moriarty's
case was that exception.

He was a Civil Engineer, and the Government, very kindly, put him quite
by himself in an out-district, with nobody but natives to talk to and a
great deal of work to do. He did his work well in the four years he
was utterly alone; but he picked up the vice of secret and solitary
drinking, and came up out of the wilderness more old and worn and
haggard than the dead-alive life had any right to make him. You know the
saying that a man who has been alone in the jungle for more than a
year is never quite sane all his life after. People credited Moriarty's
queerness of manner and moody ways to the solitude, and said it showed
how Government spoilt the futures of its best men. Moriarty had built
himself the plinth of a very good reputation in the bridge-dam-girder
line. But he knew, every night of the week, that he was taking steps
to undermine that reputation with L. L. L. and “Christopher” and little
nips of liqueurs, and filth of that kind. He had a sound constitution
and a great brain, or else he would have broken down and died like a
sick camel in the district, as better men have done before him.

Government ordered him to Simla after he had come out of the desert;
and he went up meaning to try for a post then vacant. That season, Mrs.
Reiver--perhaps you will remember her--was in the height of her power,
and many men lay under her yoke. Everything bad that could be said
has already been said about Mrs. Reiver, in another tale. Moriarty was
heavily-built and handsome, very quiet and nervously anxious to please
his neighbors when he wasn't sunk in a brown study. He started a good
deal at sudden noises or if spoken to without warning; and, when you
watched him drinking his glass of water at dinner, you could see the
hand shake a little. But all this was put down to nervousness, and the
quiet, steady, “sip-sip-sip, fill and sip-sip-sip, again,” that went
on in his own room when he was by himself, was never known. Which was
miraculous, seeing how everything in a man's private life is public
property out here.

Moriarty was drawn, not into Mrs. Reiver's set, because they were not
his sort, but into the power of Mrs. Reiver, and he fell down in front
of her and made a goddess of her. This was due to his coming fresh out
of the jungle to a big town. He could not scale things properly or see
who was what.

Because Mrs. Reiver was cold and hard, he said she was stately and
dignified. Because she had no brains, and could not talk cleverly, he
said she was reserved and shy. Mrs. Reiver shy! Because she was unworthy
of honor or reverence from any one, he reverenced her from a distance
and dowered her with all the virtues in the Bible and most of those in
Shakespeare.

This big, dark, abstracted man who was so nervous when a pony cantered
behind him, used to moon in the train of Mrs. Reiver, blushing with
pleasure when she threw a word or two his way. His admiration was
strictly platonic: even other women saw and admitted this. He did not
move out in Simla, so he heard nothing against his idol: which was
satisfactory. Mrs. Reiver took no special notice of him, beyond seeing
that he was added to her list of admirers, and going for a walk with him
now and then, just to show that he was her property, claimable as such.
Moriarty must have done most of the talking, for Mrs. Reiver couldn't
talk much to a man of his stamp; and the little she said could not have
been profitable. What Moriarty believed in, as he had good reason to,
was Mrs. Reiver's influence over him, and, in that belief, set himself
seriously to try to do away with the vice that only he himself knew of.

His experiences while he was fighting with it must have been peculiar,
but he never described them. Sometimes he would hold off from everything
except water for a week. Then, on a rainy night, when no one had asked
him out to dinner, and there was a big fire in his room, and everything
comfortable, he would sit down and make a big night of it by adding
little nip to little nip, planning big schemes of reformation meanwhile,
until he threw himself on his bed hopelessly drunk. He suffered next
morning.

One night, the big crash came. He was troubled in his own mind over his
attempts to make himself “worthy of the friendship” of Mrs. Reiver. The
past ten days had been very bad ones, and the end of it all was that he
received the arrears of two and three-quarter years of sipping in one
attack of delirium tremens of the subdued kind; beginning with suicidal
depression, going on to fits and starts and hysteria, and ending with
downright raving. As he sat in a chair in front of the fire, or walked
up and down the room picking a handkerchief to pieces, you heard what
poor Moriarty really thought of Mrs. Reiver, for he raved about her
and his own fall for the most part; though he ravelled some P. W. D.
accounts into the same skein of thought. He talked, and talked, and
talked in a low dry whisper to himself, and there was no stopping him.
He seemed to know that there was something wrong, and twice tried to
pull himself together and confer rationally with the Doctor; but his
mind ran out of control at once, and he fell back to a whisper and the
story of his troubles. It is terrible to hear a big man babbling like a
child of all that a man usually locks up, and puts away in the deep of
his heart. Moriarty read out his very soul for the benefit of any one
who was in the room between ten-thirty that night and two-forty-five
next morning.

From what he said, one gathered how immense an influence Mrs. Reiver
held over him, and how thoroughly he felt for his own lapse. His
whisperings cannot, of course, be put down here; but they were very
instructive as showing the errors of his estimates.

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

When the trouble was over, and his few acquaintances were pitying him
for the bad attack of jungle-fever that had so pulled him down, Moriarty
swore a big oath to himself and went abroad again with Mrs. Reiver till
the end of the season, adoring her in a quiet and deferential way as an
angel from heaven. Later on he took to riding--not hacking, but honest
riding--which was good proof that he was improving, and you could slam
doors behind him without his jumping to his feet with a gasp. That,
again, was hopeful.

How he kept his oath, and what it cost him in the beginning, nobody
knows. He certainly managed to compass the hardest thing that a man who
has drank heavily can do. He took his peg and wine at dinner, but he
never drank alone, and never let what he drank have the least hold on
him.

Once he told a bosom-friend the story of his great trouble, and how the
“influence of a pure honest woman, and an angel as well” had saved him.
When the man--startled at anything good being laid to Mrs. Reiver's
door--laughed, it cost him Moriarty's friendship. Moriarty, who is
married now to a woman ten thousand times better than Mrs. Reiver--a
woman who believes that there is no man on earth as good and clever as
her husband--will go down to his grave vowing and protesting that Mrs.
Reiver saved him from ruin in both worlds.

That she knew anything of Moriarty's weakness nobody believed for
a moment. That she would have cut him dead, thrown him over, and
acquainted all her friends with her discovery, if she had known of it,
nobody who knew her doubted for an instant.

Moriarty thought her something she never was, and in that belief saved
himself. Which was just as good as though she had been everything that
he had imagined.

But the question is, what claim will Mrs. Reiver have to the credit of
Moriarty's salvation, when her day of reckoning comes?




A BANK FRAUD.


     He drank strong waters and his speech was coarse;
       He purchased raiment and forebore to pay;
     He struck a trusting junior with a horse,
       And won Gymkhanas in a doubtful way.
     Then, 'twixt a vice and folly, turned aside
       To do good deeds and straight to cloak them, lied.

                                           The Mess Room.


If Reggie Burke were in India now, he would resent this tale being told;
but as he is in Hong-Kong and won't see it, the telling is safe. He was
the man who worked the big fraud on the Sind and Sialkote Bank. He was
manager of an up-country Branch, and a sound practical man with a large
experience of native loan and insurance work. He could combine the
frivolities of ordinary life with his work, and yet do well. Reggie
Burke rode anything that would let him get up, danced as neatly as he
rode, and was wanted for every sort of amusement in the Station.

As he said himself, and as many men found out rather to their surprise,
there were two Burkes, both very much at your service. “Reggie Burke,”
 between four and ten, ready for anything from a hot-weather gymkhana to
a riding-picnic; and, between ten and four, “Mr. Reginald Burke, Manager
of the Sind and Sialkote Branch Bank.” You might play polo with him one
afternoon and hear him express his opinions when a man crossed; and you
might call on him next morning to raise a two-thousand rupee loan on a
five hundred pound insurance-policy, eighty pounds paid in premiums. He
would recognize you, but you would have some trouble in recognizing him.

The Directors of the Bank--it had its headquarters in Calcutta and its
General Manager's word carried weight with the Government--picked their
men well. They had tested Reggie up to a fairly severe breaking-strain.
They trusted him just as much as Directors ever trust Managers. You must
see for yourself whether their trust was misplaced.

Reggie's Branch was in a big Station, and worked with the usual
staff--one Manager, one Accountant, both English, a Cashier, and a horde
of native clerks; besides the Police patrol at nights outside. The
bulk of its work, for it was in a thriving district, was hoondi and
accommodation of all kinds. A fool has no grip of this sort of business;
and a clever man who does not go about among his clients, and know
more than a little of their affairs, is worse than a fool. Reggie was
young-looking, clean-shaved, with a twinkle in his eye, and a head
that nothing short of a gallon of the Gunners' Madeira could make any
impression on.

One day, at a big dinner, he announced casually that the Directors had
shifted on to him a Natural Curiosity, from England, in the Accountant
line. He was perfectly correct. Mr. Silas Riley, Accountant, was a MOST
curious animal--a long, gawky, rawboned Yorkshireman, full of the
savage self-conceit that blossom's only in the best county in England.
Arrogance was a mild word for the mental attitude of Mr. S. Riley. He
had worked himself up, after seven years, to a Cashier's position in a
Huddersfield Bank; and all his experience lay among the factories of the
North. Perhaps he would have done better on the Bombay side, where they
are happy with one-half per cent. profits, and money is cheap. He was
useless for Upper India and a wheat Province, where a man wants a large
head and a touch of imagination if he is to turn out a satisfactory
balance-sheet.

He was wonderfully narrow-minded in business, and, being new to the
country, had no notion that Indian banking is totally distinct from
Home work. Like most clever self-made men, he had much simplicity in his
nature; and, somehow or other, had construed the ordinarily polite terms
of his letter of engagement into a belief that the Directors had chosen
him on account of his special and brilliant talents, and that they set
great store by him. This notion grew and crystallized; thus adding to
his natural North-country conceit. Further, he was delicate, suffered
from some trouble in his chest, and was short in his temper.

You will admit that Reggie had reason to call his new Accountant a
Natural Curiosity. The two men failed to hit it off at all. Riley
considered Reggie a wild, feather-headed idiot, given to Heaven only
knew what dissipation in low places called “Messes,” and totally unfit
for the serious and solemn vocation of banking. He could never get
over Reggie's look of youth and “you-be-damned” air; and he couldn't
understand Reggie's friends--clean-built, careless men in the Army--who
rode over to big Sunday breakfasts at the Bank, and told sultry stories
till Riley got up and left the room. Riley was always showing Reggie
how the business ought to be conducted, and Reggie had more than once to
remind him that seven years' limited experience between Huddersfield and
Beverly did not qualify a man to steer a big up-country business. Then
Riley sulked and referred to himself as a pillar of the Bank and a
cherished friend of the Directors, and Reggie tore his hair. If a man's
English subordinates fail him in this country, he comes to a hard time
indeed, for native help has strict limitations. In the winter Riley went
sick for weeks at a time with his lung complaint, and this threw more
work on Reggie. But he preferred it to the everlasting friction when
Riley was well.

One of the Travelling Inspectors of the Bank discovered these collapses
and reported them to the Directors. Now Riley had been foisted on the
Bank by an M. P., who wanted the support of Riley's father, who, again,
was anxious to get his son out to a warmer climate because of those
lungs. The M. P. had an interest in the Bank; but one of the Directors
wanted to advance a nominee of his own; and, after Riley's father had
died, he made the rest of the Board see that an Accountant who was sick
for half the year, had better give place to a healthy man. If Riley had
known the real story of his appointment, he might have behaved better;
but knowing nothing, his stretches of sickness alternated with restless,
persistent, meddling irritation of Reggie, and all the hundred ways in
which conceit in a subordinate situation can find play. Reggie used to
call him striking and hair-curling names behind his back as a relief to
his own feelings; but he never abused him to his face, because he said:
“Riley is such a frail beast that half of his loathsome conceit is due
to pains in the chest.”

Late one April, Riley went very sick indeed. The doctor punched him
and thumped him, and told him he would be better before long. Then the
doctor went to Reggie and said:--“Do you know how sick your Accountant
is?” “No!” said Reggie--“The worse the better, confound him! He's a
clacking nuisance when he's well. I'll let you take away the Bank Safe
if you can drug him silent for this hot-weather.”

But the doctor did not laugh--“Man, I'm not joking,” he said. “I'll give
him another three months in his bed and a week or so more to die in.
On my honor and reputation that's all the grace he has in this world.
Consumption has hold of him to the marrow.”

Reggie's face changed at once into the face of “Mr. Reginald Burke,” and
he answered:--“What can I do?”

“Nothing,” said the doctor. “For all practical purposes the man is dead
already. Keep him quiet and cheerful and tell him he's going to recover.
That's all. I'll look after him to the end, of course.”

The doctor went away, and Reggie sat down to open the evening mail. His
first letter was one from the Directors, intimating for his information
that Mr. Riley was to resign, under a month's notice, by the terms of
his agreement, telling Reggie that their letter to Riley would follow
and advising Reggie of the coming of a new Accountant, a man whom Reggie
knew and liked.

Reggie lit a cheroot, and, before he had finished smoking, he had
sketched the outline of a fraud. He put away--“burked”--the Directors
letter, and went in to talk to Riley, who was as ungracious as usual,
and fretting himself over the way the bank would run during his illness.
He never thought of the extra work on Reggie's shoulders, but solely of
the damage to his own prospects of advancement. Then Reggie assured him
that everything would be well, and that he, Reggie, would confer with
Riley daily on the management of the Bank. Riley was a little soothed,
but he hinted in as many words that he did not think much of Reggie's
business capacity. Reggie was humble. And he had letters in his desk
from the Directors that a Gilbarte or a Hardie might have been proud of!

The days passed in the big darkened house, and the Directors' letter of
dismissal to Riley came and was put away by Reggie, who, every evening,
brought the books to Riley's room, and showed him what had been going
forward, while Riley snarled. Reggie did his best to make statements
pleasing to Riley, but the Accountant was sure that the Bank was going
to rack and ruin without him. In June, as the lying in bed told on his
spirit, he asked whether his absence had been noted by the Directors,
and Reggie said that they had written most sympathetic letters, hoping
that he would be able to resume his valuable services before long. He
showed Riley the letters: and Riley said that the Directors ought to
have written to him direct. A few days later, Reggie opened Riley's
mail in the half-light of the room, and gave him the sheet--not the
envelope--of a letter to Riley from the Directors. Riley said he would
thank Reggie not to interfere with his private papers, specially as
Reggie knew he was too weak to open his own letters. Reggie apologized.

Then Riley's mood changed, and he lectured Reggie on his evil ways:
his horses and his bad friends. “Of course, lying here on my back, Mr.
Burke, I can't keep you straight; but when I'm well, I DO hope you'll
pay some heed to my words.” Reggie, who had dropped polo, and dinners,
and tennis, and all to attend to Riley, said that he was penitent and
settled Riley's head on the pillow and heard him fret and contradict in
hard, dry, hacking whispers, without a sign of impatience. This at the
end of a heavy day's office work, doing double duty, in the latter half
of June.

When the new Accountant came, Reggie told him the facts of the case, and
announced to Riley that he had a guest staying with him. Riley said that
he might have had more consideration than to entertain his “doubtful
friends” at such a time. Reggie made Carron, the new Accountant, sleep
at the Club in consequence. Carron's arrival took some of the heavy work
off his shoulders, and he had time to attend to Riley's exactions--to
explain, soothe, invent, and settle and resettle the poor wretch in
bed, and to forge complimentary letters from Calcutta. At the end of the
first month, Riley wished to send some money home to his mother. Reggie
sent the draft. At the end of the second month, Riley's salary came in
just the same. Reggie paid it out of his own pocket; and, with it, wrote
Riley a beautiful letter from the Directors.

Riley was very ill indeed, but the flame of his life burnt unsteadily.
Now and then he would be cheerful and confident about the future,
sketching plans for going Home and seeing his mother. Reggie listened
patiently when the office work was over, and encouraged him.

At other times Riley insisted on Reggie's reading the Bible and grim
“Methody” tracts to him. Out of these tracts he pointed morals directed
at his Manager. But he always found time to worry Reggie about the
working of the Bank, and to show him where the weak points lay.

This in-door, sick-room life and constant strains wore Reggie down a
good deal, and shook his nerves, and lowered his billiard-play by forty
points. But the business of the Bank, and the business of the sick-room,
had to go on, though the glass was 116 degrees in the shade.

At the end of the third month, Riley was sinking fast, and had begun
to realize that he was very sick. But the conceit that made him worry
Reggie, kept him from believing the worst. “He wants some sort of mental
stimulant if he is to drag on,” said the doctor. “Keep him interested in
life if you care about his living.” So Riley, contrary to all the laws
of business and the finance, received a 25-per-cent, rise of salary from
the Directors. The “mental stimulant” succeeded beautifully. Riley was
happy and cheerful, and, as is often the case in consumption, healthiest
in mind when the body was weakest. He lingered for a full month,
snarling and fretting about the Bank, talking of the future, hearing the
Bible read, lecturing Reggie on sin, and wondering when he would be able
to move abroad.

But at the end of September, one mercilessly hot evening, he rose up in
his bed with a little gasp, and said quickly to Reggie:--“Mr. Burke, I
am going to die. I know it in myself. My chest is all hollow inside, and
there's nothing to breathe with. To the best of my knowledge I have done
nowt”--he was returning to the talk of his boyhood--“to lie heavy on my
conscience. God be thanked, I have been preserved from the grosser forms
of sin; and I counsel YOU, Mr. Burke....”

Here his voice died down, and Reggie stooped over him.

“Send my salary for September to my mother.... done great things with
the Bank if I had been spared.... mistaken policy.... no fault of mine.”

Then he turned his face to the wall and died.

Reggie drew the sheet over Its face, and went out into the verandah,
with his last “mental stimulant”--a letter of condolence and sympathy
from the Directors--unused in his pocket.

“If I'd been only ten minutes earlier,” thought Reggie, “I might have
heartened him up to pull through another day.”




TOD'S AMENDMENT.


     The World hath set its heavy yoke
     Upon the old white-bearded folk
       Who strive to please the King.
     God's mercy is upon the young,
     God's wisdom in the baby tongue
       That fears not anything.

          The Parable of Chajju Bhagat.


Now Tods' Mamma was a singularly charming woman, and every one in Simla
knew Tods. Most men had saved him from death on occasions. He was beyond
his ayah's control altogether, and perilled his life daily to find out
what would happen if you pulled a Mountain Battery mule's tail. He was
an utterly fearless young Pagan, about six years old, and the only baby
who ever broke the holy calm of the supreme Legislative Council.

It happened this way: Tods' pet kid got loose, and fled up the hill, off
the Boileaugunge Road, Tods after it, until it burst into the Viceregal
Lodge lawn, then attached to “Peterhoff.” The Council were sitting at
the time, and the windows were open because it was warm. The Red Lancer
in the porch told Tods to go away; but Tods knew the Red Lancer and most
of the Members of Council personally. Moreover, he had firm hold of the
kid's collar, and was being dragged all across the flower-beds. “Give
my salaam to the long Councillor Sahib, and ask him to help me take
Moti back!” gasped Tods. The Council heard the noise through the open
windows; and, after an interval, was seen the shocking spectacle of
a Legal Member and a Lieutenant-Governor helping, under the direct
patronage of a Commander-in-Chief and a Viceroy, one small and very
dirty boy in a sailor's suit and a tangle of brown hair, to coerce a
lively and rebellious kid. They headed it off down the path to the Mall,
and Tods went home in triumph and told his Mamma that ALL the Councillor
Sahibs had been helping him to catch Moti. Whereat his Mamma smacked
Tods for interfering with the administration of the Empire; but Tods met
the Legal Member the next day, and told him in confidence that if the
Legal Member ever wanted to catch a goat, he, Tods, would give him all
the help in his power. “Thank you, Tods,” said the Legal Member.

Tods was the idol of some eighty jhampanis, and half as many saises.
He saluted them all as “O Brother.” It never entered his head that
any living human being could disobey his orders; and he was the
buffer between the servants and his Mamma's wrath. The working of that
household turned on Tods, who was adored by every one from the dhoby
to the dog-boy. Even Futteh Khan, the villainous loafer khit from
Mussoorie, shirked risking Tods' displeasure for fear his co-mates
should look down on him.

So Tods had honor in the land from Boileaugunge to Chota Simla, and
ruled justly according to his lights. Of course, he spoke Urdu, but he
had also mastered many queer side-speeches like the chotee bolee of the
women, and held grave converse with shopkeepers and Hill-coolies alike.
He was precocious for his age, and his mixing with natives had taught
him some of the more bitter truths of life; the meanness and the
sordidness of it. He used, over his bread and milk, to deliver solemn
and serious aphorisms, translated from the vernacular into the English,
that made his Mamma jump and vow that Tods MUST go home next hot
weather.

Just when Tods was in the bloom of his power, the Supreme Legislature
were hacking out a Bill, for the Sub-Montane Tracts, a revision of the
then Act, smaller than the Punjab Land Bill, but affecting a few
hundred thousand people none the less. The Legal Member had built,
and bolstered, and embroidered, and amended that Bill, till it looked
beautiful on paper. Then the Council began to settle what they called
the “minor details.” As if any Englishman legislating for natives knows
enough to know which are the minor and which are the major points, from
the native point of view, of any measure! That Bill was a triumph of
“safe guarding the interests of the tenant.” One clause provided that
land should not be leased on longer terms than five years at a stretch;
because, if the landlord had a tenant bound down for, say, twenty years,
he would squeeze the very life out of him. The notion was to keep up
a stream of independent cultivators in the Sub-Montane Tracts; and
ethnologically and politically the notion was correct. The only drawback
was that it was altogether wrong. A native's life in India implies the
life of his son. Wherefore, you cannot legislate for one generation at
a time. You must consider the next from the native point of view.
Curiously enough, the native now and then, and in Northern India more
particularly, hates being over-protected against himself. There was
a Naga village once, where they lived on dead AND buried Commissariat
mules.... But that is another story.

For many reasons, to be explained later, the people concerned objected
to the Bill. The Native Member in Council knew as much about Punjabis as
he knew about Charing Cross. He had said in Calcutta that “the Bill was
entirely in accord with the desires of that large and important class,
the cultivators;” and so on, and so on. The Legal Member's knowledge
of natives was limited to English-speaking Durbaris, and his own red
chaprassis, the Sub-Montane Tracts concerned no one in particular,
the Deputy Commissioners were a good deal too driven to make
representations, and the measure was one which dealt with small
landholders only. Nevertheless, the Legal Member prayed that it might be
correct, for he was a nervously conscientious man. He did not know that
no man can tell what natives think unless he mixes with them with the
varnish off. And not always then. But he did the best he knew. And the
measure came up to the Supreme Council for the final touches, while Tods
patrolled the Burra Simla Bazar in his morning rides, and played with
the monkey belonging to Ditta Mull, the bunnia, and listened, as a child
listens to all the stray talk about this new freak of the Lat Sahib's.

One day there was a dinner-party, at the house of Tods' Mamma, and the
Legal Member came. Tods was in bed, but he kept awake till he heard the
bursts of laughter from the men over the coffee. Then he paddled out in
his little red flannel dressing-gown and his night-suit, and took refuge
by the side of his father, knowing that he would not be sent back. “See
the miseries of having a family!” said Tods' father, giving Tods three
prunes, some water in a glass that had been used for claret, and telling
him to sit still. Tods sucked the prunes slowly, knowing that he would
have to go when they were finished, and sipped the pink water like a man
of the world, as he listened to the conversation. Presently, the Legal
Member, talking “shop,” to the Head of a Department, mentioned his Bill
by its full name--“The Sub-Montane Tracts Ryotwari Revised Enactment.”
 Tods caught the one native word, and lifting up his small voice
said:--“Oh, I know ALL about that! Has it been murramutted yet,
Councillor Sahib?”

“How much?” said the Legal Member.

“Murramutted--mended.--Put theek, you know--made nice to please Ditta
Mull!”

The Legal Member left his place and moved up next to Tods.

“What do you know about Ryotwari, little man?” he said.

“I'm not a little man, I'm Tods, and I know ALL about it. Ditta Mull,
and Choga Lall, and Amir Nath, and--oh, lakhs of my friends tell me
about it in the bazars when I talk to them.”

“Oh, they do--do they? What do they say, Tods?”

Tods tucked his feet under his red flannel dressing-gown and said:--“I
must fink.”

The Legal Member waited patiently. Then Tods, with infinite compassion:

“You don't speak my talk, do you, Councillor Sahib?”

“No; I am sorry to say I do not,” said the Legal Member.

“Very well,” said Tods. “I must fink in English.”

He spent a minute putting his ideas in order, and began very slowly,
translating in his mind from the vernacular to English, as many
Anglo-Indian children do. You must remember that the Legal Member
helped him on by questions when he halted, for Tods was not equal to the
sustained flight of oratory that follows.

“Ditta Mull says:--'This thing is the talk of a child, and was made up
by fools.' But I don't think you are a fool, Councillor Sahib,” said
Todds, hastily. “You caught my goat. This is what Ditta Mull says:--'I
am not a fool, and why should the Sirkar say I am a child? I can see if
the land is good and if the landlord is good. If I am a fool, the sin is
upon my own head. For five years I take my ground for which I have saved
money, and a wife I take too, and a little son is born.' Ditta Mull has
one daughter now, but he SAYS he will have a son, soon. And he says: 'At
the end of five years, by this new bundobust, I must go. If I do not go,
I must get fresh seals and takkus-stamps on the papers, perhaps in the
middle of the harvest, and to go to the law-courts once is wisdom, but
to go twice is Jehannum.' That is QUITE true,” explained Tods, gravely.
“All my friends say so. And Ditta Mull says:--'Always fresh takkus and
paying money to vakils and chaprassis and law-courts every five years or
else the landlord makes me go. Why do I want to go? Am I fool? If I am a
fool and do not know, after forty years, good land when I see it, let
me die! But if the new bundobust says for FIFTEEN years, then it is
good and wise. My little son is a man, and I am burnt, and he takes the
ground or another ground, paying only once for the takkus-stamps on the
papers, and his little son is born, and at the end of fifteen years is
a man too. But what profit is there in five years and fresh papers?
Nothing but dikh, trouble, dikh. We are not young men who take these
lands, but old ones--not jais, but tradesmen with a little money--and
for fifteen years we shall have peace. Nor are we children that the
Sirkar should treat us so.”

Here Tods stopped short, for the whole table were listening. The Legal
Member said to Tods: “Is that all?”

“All I can remember,” said Tods. “But you should see Ditta Mull's big
monkey. It's just like a Councillor Sahib.”

“Tods! Go to bed,” said his father.

Tods gathered up his dressing-gown tail and departed.

The Legal Member brought his hand down on the table with a crash--“By
Jove!” said the Legal Member, “I believe the boy is right. The short
tenure IS the weak point.”

He left early, thinking over what Tods had said. Now, it was obviously
impossible for the Legal Member to play with a bunnia's monkey, by way
of getting understanding; but he did better. He made inquiries,
always bearing in mind the fact that the real native--not the hybrid,
University-trained mule--is as timid as a colt, and, little by little,
he coaxed some of the men whom the measure concerned most intimately to
give in their views, which squared very closely with Tods' evidence.

So the Bill was amended in that clause; and the Legal Member was filled
with an uneasy suspicion that Native Members represent very little
except the Orders they carry on their bosoms. But he put the thought
from him as illiberal. He was a most Liberal Man.

After a time the news spread through the bazars that Tods had got the
Bill recast in the tenure clause, and if Tods' Mamma had not interfered,
Tods would have made himself sick on the baskets of fruit and pistachio
nuts and Cabuli grapes and almonds that crowded the verandah. Till he
went Home, Tods ranked some few degrees before the Viceroy in popular
estimation. But for the little life of him Tods could not understand
why.

In the Legal Member's private-paper-box still lies the rough draft of
the Sub-Montane Tracts Ryotwari Revised Enactment; and, opposite the
twenty-second clause, pencilled in blue chalk, and signed by the Legal
Member, are the words “Tods' Amendment.”




IN THE PRIDE OF HIS YOUTH.


     “Stopped in the straight when the race was his own!
     Look at him cutting it--cur to the bone!”
      “Ask ere the youngster be rated and chidden,
     What did he carry and how was he ridden?
     Maybe they used him too much at the start;
     Maybe Fate's weight-cloths are breaking his heart.”

                                       Life's Handicap.


When I was telling you of the joke that The Worm played off on the
Senior Subaltern, I promised a somewhat similar tale, but with all the
jest left out. This is that tale:

Dicky Hatt was kidnapped in his early, early youth--neither by
landlady's daughter, housemaid, barmaid, nor cook, but by a girl so
nearly of his own caste that only a woman could have said she was just
the least little bit in the world below it. This happened a month
before he came out to India, and five days after his one-and-twentieth
birthday. The girl was nineteen--six years older than Dicky in the
things of this world, that is to say--and, for the time, twice as
foolish as he.

Excepting, always, falling off a horse there is nothing more fatally
easy than marriage before the Registrar. The ceremony costs less than
fifty shillings, and is remarkably like walking into a pawn-shop. After
the declarations of residence have been put in, four minutes will
cover the rest of the proceedings--fees, attestation, and all. Then the
Registrar slides the blotting-pad over the names, and says grimly, with
his pen between his teeth:--“Now you're man and wife;” and the couple
walk out into the street, feeling as if something were horribly illegal
somewhere.

But that ceremony holds and can drag a man to his undoing just
as thoroughly as the “long as ye both shall live” curse from the
altar-rails, with the bridesmaids giggling behind, and “The Voice that
breathed o'er Eden” lifting the roof off. In this manner was Dicky Hatt
kidnapped, and he considered it vastly fine, for he had received an
appointment in India which carried a magnificent salary from the Home
point of view. The marriage was to be kept secret for a year. Then Mrs.
Dicky Hatt was to come out and the rest of life was to be a glorious
golden mist. That was how they sketched it under the Addison Road
Station lamps; and, after one short month, came Gravesend and Dicky
steaming out to his new life, and the girl crying in a thirty-shillings
a week bed-and-living room, in a back street off Montpelier Square near
the Knightsbridge Barracks.

But the country that Dicky came to was a hard land, where “men” of
twenty-one were reckoned very small boys indeed, and life was expensive.
The salary that loomed so large six thousand miles away did not go far.
Particularly when Dicky divided it by two, and remitted more than the
fair half, at 1-6, to Montpelier Square. One hundred and thirty-five
rupees out of three hundred and thirty is not much to live on; but
it was absurd to suppose that Mrs. Hatt could exist forever on the 20
pounds held back by Dicky, from his outfit allowance. Dicky saw this,
and remitted at once; always remembering that Rs. 700 were to be paid,
twelve months later, for a first-class passage out for a lady. When you
add to these trifling details the natural instincts of a boy beginning a
new life in a new country and longing to go about and enjoy himself, and
the necessity for grappling with strange work--which, properly speaking,
should take up a boy's undivided attention--you will see that Dicky
started handicapped. He saw it himself for a breath or two; but he did
not guess the full beauty of his future.

As the hot weather began, the shackles settled on him and ate into his
flesh. First would come letters--big, crossed, seven sheet letters--from
his wife, telling him how she longed to see him, and what a Heaven
upon earth would be their property when they met. Then some boy of the
chummery wherein Dicky lodged would pound on the door of his bare little
room, and tell him to come out and look at a pony--the very thing to
suit him. Dicky could not afford ponies. He had to explain this. Dicky
could not afford living in the chummery, modest as it was. He had to
explain this before he moved to a single room next the office where
he worked all day. He kept house on a green oil-cloth table-cover, one
chair, one charpoy, one photograph, one tooth-glass, very strong and
thick, a seven-rupee eight-anna filter, and messing by contract at
thirty-seven rupees a month. Which last item was extortion. He had no
punkah, for a punkah costs fifteen rupees a month; but he slept on the
roof of the office with all his wife's letters under his pillow. Now and
again he was asked out to dinner where he got both a punkah and an iced
drink. But this was seldom, for people objected to recognizing a boy who
had evidently the instincts of a Scotch tallow-chandler, and who lived
in such a nasty fashion. Dicky could not subscribe to any amusement, so
he found no amusement except the pleasure of turning over his Bank-book
and reading what it said about “loans on approved security.” That cost
nothing. He remitted through a Bombay Bank, by the way, and the Station
knew nothing of his private affairs.

Every month he sent Home all he could possibly spare for his wife--and
for another reason which was expected to explain itself shortly and
would require more money.

About this time, Dicky was overtaken with the nervous, haunting fear
that besets married men when they are out of sorts. He had no pension to
look to. What if he should die suddenly, and leave his wife unprovided
for? The thought used to lay hold of him in the still, hot nights on the
roof, till the shaking of his heart made him think that he was going to
die then and there of heart-disease. Now this is a frame of mind which
no boy has a right to know. It is a strong man's trouble; but, coming
when it did, it nearly drove poor punkah-less, perspiring Dicky Hatt
mad. He could tell no one about it.

A certain amount of “screw” is as necessary for a man as for a
billiard-ball. It makes them both do wonderful things. Dicky needed
money badly, and he worked for it like a horse. But, naturally, the men
who owned him knew that a boy can live very comfortably on a certain
income--pay in India is a matter of age, not merit, you see, and if
their particular boy wished to work like two boys, Business forbid that
they should stop him! But Business forbid that they should give him an
increase of pay at his present ridiculously immature age! So Dicky won
certain rises of salary--ample for a boy--not enough for a wife and
child--certainly too little for the seven-hundred-rupee passage that he
and Mrs. Hatt had discussed so lightly once upon a time. And with this
he was forced to be content.

Somehow, all his money seemed to fade away in Home drafts and the
crushing Exchange, and the tone of the Home letters changed and grew
querulous. “Why wouldn't Dicky have his wife and the baby out? Surely he
had a salary--a fine salary--and it was too bad of him to enjoy himself
in India. But would he--could he--make the next draft a little more
elastic?” Here followed a list of baby's kit, as long as a Parsee's
bill. Then Dicky, whose heart yearned to his wife and the little son
he had never seen--which, again, is a feeling no boy is entitled
to--enlarged the draft and wrote queer half-boy, half-man letters,
saying that life was not so enjoyable after all and would the little
wife wait yet a little longer? But the little wife, however much she
approved of money, objected to waiting, and there was a strange, hard
sort of ring in her letters that Dicky didn't understand. How could he,
poor boy?

Later on still--just as Dicky had been told--apropos of another
youngster who had “made a fool of himself,” as the saying is--that
matrimony would not only ruin his further chances of advancement, but
would lose him his present appointment--came the news that the baby, his
own little, little son, had died, and, behind this, forty lines of
an angry woman's scrawl, saying that death might have been averted if
certain things, all costing money, had been done, or if the mother and
the baby had been with Dicky. The letter struck at Dicky's naked heart;
but, not being officially entitled to a baby, he could show no sign of
trouble.

How Dicky won through the next four months, and what hope he kept
alight to force him into his work, no one dare say. He pounded on, the
seven-hundred-rupee passage as far away as ever, and his style of living
unchanged, except when he launched into a new filter. There was the
strain of his office-work, and the strain of his remittances, and the
knowledge of his boy's death, which touched the boy more, perhaps, than
it would have touched a man; and, beyond all, the enduring strain of
his daily life. Gray-headed seniors, who approved of his thrift and his
fashion of denying himself everything pleasant, reminded him of the old
saw that says:


     “If a youth would be distinguished in his art, art, art,
      He must keep the girls away from his heart, heart, heart.”


And Dicky, who fancied he had been through every trouble that a man is
permitted to know, had to laugh and agree; with the last line of his
balanced Bank-book jingling in his head day and night.

But he had one more sorrow to digest before the end. There arrived a
letter from the little wife--the natural sequence of the others if
Dicky had only known it--and the burden of that letter was “gone with
a handsomer man than you.” It was a rather curious production, without
stops, something like this:--“She was not going to wait forever and the
baby was dead and Dicky was only a boy and he would never set eyes on
her again and why hadn't he waved his handkerchief to her when he left
Gravesend and God was her judge she was a wicked woman but Dicky was
worse enjoying himself in India and this other man loved the ground she
trod on and would Dicky ever forgive her for she would never forgive
Dicky; and there was no address to write to.”

Instead of thanking his lucky stars that he was free, Dicky discovered
exactly how an injured husband feels--again, not at all the knowledge
to which a boy is entitled--for his mind went back to his wife as he
remembered her in the thirty-shilling “suite” in Montpelier Square, when
the dawn of his last morning in England was breaking, and she was crying
in the bed. Whereat he rolled about on his bed and bit his fingers. He
never stopped to think whether, if he had met Mrs. Hatt after those
two years, he would have discovered that he and she had grown quite
different and new persons. This, theoretically, he ought to have done.
He spent the night after the English Mail came in rather severe pain.

Next morning, Dicky Hatt felt disinclined to work. He argued that he had
missed the pleasure of youth. He was tired, and he had tasted all the
sorrow in life before three-and-twenty. His Honor was gone--that was the
man; and now he, too, would go to the Devil--that was the boy in him. So
he put his head down on the green oil-cloth table-cover, and wept before
resigning his post, and all it offered.

But the reward of his services came. He was given three days to
reconsider himself, and the Head of the establishment, after some
telegraphings, said that it was a most unusual step, but, in view of the
ability that Mr. Hatt had displayed at such and such a time, at such and
such junctures, he was in a position to offer him an infinitely superior
post--first on probation, and later, in the natural course of things,
on confirmation. “And how much does the post carry?” said Dicky. “Six
hundred and fifty rupees,” said the Head slowly, expecting to see the
young man sink with gratitude and joy.

And it came then! The seven hundred rupee passage, and enough to have
saved the wife, and the little son, and to have allowed of assured and
open marriage, came then. Dicky burst into a roar of laughter--laughter
he could not check--nasty, jangling merriment that seemed as if it
would go on forever. When he had recovered himself he said, quite
seriously:--“I'm tired of work. I'm an old man now. It's about time I
retired. And I will.”

“The boy's mad!” said the Head.

I think he was right; but Dicky Hatt never reappeared to settle the
question.




PIG.


     Go, stalk the red deer o'er the heather
       Ride, follow the fox if you can!
     But, for pleasure and profit together,
       Allow me the hunting of Man,--
     The chase of the Human, the search for the Soul
       To its ruin,--the hunting of Man.

                                  The Old Shikarri.


I believe the difference began in the matter of a horse, with a twist in
his temper, whom Pinecoffin sold to Nafferton and by whom Nafferton was
nearly slain. There may have been other causes of offence; the horse was
the official stalking-horse. Nafferton was very angry; but Pinecoffin
laughed and said that he had never guaranteed the beast's manners.
Nafferton laughed, too, though he vowed that he would write off his fall
against Pinecoffin if he waited five years. Now, a Dalesman from beyond
Skipton will forgive an injury when the Strid lets a man live; but a
South Devon man is as soft as a Dartmoor bog. You can see from their
names that Nafferton had the race-advantage of Pinecoffin. He was a
peculiar man, and his notions of humor were cruel. He taught me a new
and fascinating form of shikar. He hounded Pinecoffin from Mithankot
to Jagadri, and from Gurgaon to Abbottabad up and across the Punjab,
a large province and in places remarkably dry. He said that he had no
intention of allowing Assistant Commissioners to “sell him pups,” in the
shape of ramping, screaming countrybreds, without making their lives a
burden to them.

Most Assistant Commissioners develop a bent for some special work after
their first hot weather in the country. The boys with digestions hope to
write their names large on the Frontier and struggle for dreary places
like Bannu and Kohat. The bilious ones climb into the Secretariat. Which
is very bad for the liver. Others are bitten with a mania for District
work, Ghuznivide coins or Persian poetry; while some, who come of
farmers' stock, find that the smell of the Earth after the Rains gets
into their blood, and calls them to “develop the resources of the
Province.” These men are enthusiasts. Pinecoffin belonged to their
class. He knew a great many facts bearing on the cost of bullocks and
temporary wells, and opium-scrapers, and what happens if you burn too
much rubbish on a field, in the hope of enriching used-up soil. All the
Pinecoffins come of a landholding breed, and so the land only took back
her own again. Unfortunately--most unfortunately for Pinecoffin--he
was a Civilian, as well as a farmer. Nafferton watched him, and thought
about the horse. Nafferton said:--“See me chase that boy till he drops!”
 I said:--“You can't get your knife into an Assistant Commissioner.”
 Nafferton told me that I did not understand the administration of the
Province.

Our Government is rather peculiar. It gushes on the agricultural and
general information side, and will supply a moderately respectable man
with all sorts of “economic statistics,” if he speaks to it prettily.
For instance, you are interested in gold-washing in the sands of the
Sutlej. You pull the string, and find that it wakes up half a dozen
Departments, and finally communicates, say, with a friend of yours
in the Telegraph, who once wrote some notes on the customs of the
gold-washers when he was on construction-work in their part of the
Empire. He may or may not be pleased at being ordered to write out
everything he knows for your benefit. This depends on his temperament.
The bigger man you are, the more information and the greater trouble can
you raise.

Nafferton was not a big man; but he had the reputation of being very
earnest. An “earnest” man can do much with a Government. There was an
earnest man who once nearly wrecked... but all India knows THAT story.
I am not sure what real “earnestness” is. A very fair imitation can
be manufactured by neglecting to dress decently, by mooning about in a
dreamy, misty sort of way, by taking office-work home after staying
in office till seven, and by receiving crowds of native gentlemen on
Sundays. That is one sort of “earnestness.”

Nafferton cast about for a peg whereon to hang his earnestness, and for
a string that would communicate with Pinecoffin. He found both. They
were Pig. Nafferton became an earnest inquirer after Pig. He informed
the Government that he had a scheme whereby a very large percentage of
the British Army in India could be fed, at a very large saving, on
Pig. Then he hinted that Pinecoffin might supply him with the “varied
information necessary to the proper inception of the scheme.” So the
Government wrote on the back of the letter:--“Instruct Mr. Pinecoffin to
furnish Mr. Nafferton with any information in his power.” Government is
very prone to writing things on the backs of letters which, later, lead
to trouble and confusion.

Nafferton had not the faintest interest in Pig, but he knew that
Pinecoffin would flounce into the trap. Pinecoffin was delighted at
being consulted about Pig. The Indian Pig is not exactly an important
factor in agricultural life; but Nafferton explained to Pinecoffin that
there was room for improvement, and corresponded direct with that young
man.

You may think that there is not much to be evolved from Pig. It all
depends how you set to work. Pinecoffin being a Civilian and wishing
to do things thoroughly, began with an essay on the Primitive Pig,
the Mythology of the Pig, and the Dravidian Pig. Nafferton filed that
information--twenty-seven foolscap sheets--and wanted to know about the
distribution of the Pig in the Punjab, and how it stood the Plains in
the hot weather. From this point onwards, remember that I am giving you
only the barest outlines of the affair--the guy-ropes, as it were, of
the web that Nafferton spun round Pinecoffin.

Pinecoffin made a colored Pig-population map, and collected observations
on the comparative longevity of the Pig (a) in the sub-montane tracts
of the Himalayas, and (b) in the Rechna Doab. Nafferton filed that, and
asked what sort of people looked after Pig. This started an ethnological
excursus on swineherds, and drew from Pinecoffin long tables showing
the proportion per thousand of the caste in the Derajat. Nafferton filed
that bundle, and explained that the figures which he wanted referred to
the Cis-Sutlej states, where he understood that Pigs were very fine
and large, and where he proposed to start a Piggery. By this time,
Government had quite forgotten their instructions to Mr. Pinecoffin.
They were like the gentlemen, in Keats' poem, who turned well-oiled
wheels to skin other people. But Pinecoffin was just entering into the
spirit of the Pig-hunt, as Nafferton well knew he would do. He had a
fair amount of work of his own to clear away; but he sat up of nights
reducing Pig to five places of decimals for the honor of his Service. He
was not going to appear ignorant of so easy a subject as Pig.

Then Government sent him on special duty to Kohat, to “inquire into”
 the big-seven-foot, iron-shod spades of that District. People had been
killing each other with those peaceful tools; and Government wished
to know “whether a modified form of agricultural implement could
not, tentatively and as a temporary measure, be introduced among the
agricultural population without needlessly or unduly exasperating the
existing religious sentiments of the peasantry.”

Between those spades and Nafferton's Pig, Pinecoffin was rather heavily
burdened.

Nafferton now began to take up “(a) The food-supply of the indigenous
Pig, with a view to the improvement of its capacities as a flesh-former.
(b) The acclimatization of the exotic Pig, maintaining its distinctive
peculiarities.” Pinecoffin replied exhaustively that the exotic Pig
would become merged in the indigenous type; and quoted horse-breeding
statistics to prove this. The side-issue was debated, at great length on
Pinecoffin's side, till Nafferton owned that he had been in the wrong,
and moved the previous question. When Pinecoffin had quite written
himself out about flesh-formers, and fibrins, and glucose and the
nitrogenous constituents of maize and lucerne, Nafferton raised the
question of expense. By this time Pinecoffin, who had been transferred
from Kohat, had developed a Pig theory of his own, which he stated in
thirty-three folio pages--all carefully filed by Nafferton. Who asked
for more.

These things took ten months, and Pinecoffin's interest in the potential
Piggery seemed to die down after he had stated his own views. But
Nafferton bombarded him with letters on “the Imperial aspect of
the scheme, as tending to officialize the sale of pork, and thereby
calculated to give offence to the Mahomedan population of Upper India.”
 He guessed that Pinecoffin would want some broad, free-hand work after
his niggling, stippling, decimal details. Pinecoffin handled the latest
development of the case in masterly style, and proved that no “popular
ebullition of excitement was to be apprehended.” Nafferton said that
there was nothing like Civilian insight in matters of this kind,
and lured him up a bye-path--“the possible profits to accrue to the
Government from the sale of hog-bristles.” There is an extensive
literature of hog-bristles, and the shoe, brush, and colorman's trades
recognize more varieties of bristles than you would think possible.
After Pinecoffin had wondered a little at Nafferton's rage for
information, he sent back a monograph, fifty-one pages, on “Products of
the Pig.” This led him, under Nafferton's tender handling, straight to
the Cawnpore factories, the trade in hog-skin for saddles--and thence
to the tanners. Pinecoffin wrote that pomegranate-seed was the best cure
for hog-skin, and suggested--for the past fourteen months had wearied
him--that Nafferton should “raise his pigs before he tanned them.”

Nafferton went back to the second section of his fifth question. How
could the exotic Pig be brought to give as much pork as it did in the
West and yet “assume the essentially hirsute characteristics of its
oriental congener?” Pinecoffin felt dazed, for he had forgotten what
he had written sixteen month's before, and fancied that he was about
to reopen the entire question. He was too far involved in the hideous
tangle to retreat, and, in a weak moment, he wrote:--“Consult my first
letter.” Which related to the Dravidian Pig. As a matter of fact,
Pinecoffin had still to reach the acclimatization stage; having gone off
on a side-issue on the merging of types.

THEN Nafferton really unmasked his batteries! He complained to the
Government, in stately language, of “the paucity of help accorded to me
in my earnest attempts to start a potentially remunerative industry, and
the flippancy with which my requests for information are treated by a
gentleman whose pseudo-scholarly attainments should at lest have taught
him the primary differences between the Dravidian and the Berkshire
variety of the genus Sus. If I am to understand that the letter to which
he refers me contains his serious views on the acclimatization of a
valuable, though possibly uncleanly, animal, I am reluctantly compelled
to believe,” etc., etc.

There was a new man at the head of the Department of Castigation. The
wretched Pinecoffin was told that the Service was made for the Country,
and not the Country for the Service, and that he had better begin to
supply information about Pigs.

Pinecoffin answered insanely that he had written everything that could
be written about Pig, and that some furlough was due to him.

Nafferton got a copy of that letter, and sent it, with the essay on the
Dravidian Pig, to a down-country paper, which printed both in full. The
essay was rather highflown; but if the Editor had seen the stacks of
paper, in Pinecoffin's handwriting, on Nafferton's table, he would not
have been so sarcastic about the “nebulous discursiveness and blatant
self-sufficiency of the modern Competition-wallah, and his utter
inability to grasp the practical issues of a practical question.” Many
friends cut out these remarks and sent them to Pinecoffin.

I have already stated that Pinecoffin came of a soft stock. This last
stroke frightened and shook him. He could not understand it; but he felt
he had been, somehow, shamelessly betrayed by Nafferton. He realized
that he had wrapped himself up in the Pigskin without need, and that
he could not well set himself right with his Government. All his
acquaintances asked after his “nebulous discursiveness” or his “blatant
self-sufficiency,” and this made him miserable.

He took a train and went to Nafferton, whom he had not seen since
the Pig business began. He also took the cutting from the paper, and
blustered feebly and called Nafferton names, and then died down to a
watery, weak protest of the “I-say-it's-too-bad-you-know” order.

Nafferton was very sympathetic.

“I'm afraid I've given you a good deal of trouble, haven't I?” said he.

“Trouble!” whimpered Pinecoffin; “I don't mind the trouble so much,
though that was bad enough; but what I resent is this showing up in
print. It will stick to me like a burr all through my service. And I DID
do my best for your interminable swine. It's too bad of you, on my soul
it is!”

“I don't know,” said Nafferton; “have you ever been stuck with a horse?
It isn't the money I mind, though that is bad enough; but what I resent
is the chaff that follows, especially from the boy who stuck me. But I
think we'll cry quits now.”

Pinecoffin found nothing to say save bad words; and Nafferton smiled
ever so sweetly, and asked him to dinner.




THE ROUT OF THE WHITE HUSSARS.


     It was not in the open fight
       We threw away the sword,
     But in the lonely watching
       In the darkness by the ford.
     The waters lapped, the night-wind blew,
     Full-armed the Fear was born and grew,
     And we were flying ere we knew
       From panic in the night.

                          Beoni Bar.


Some people hold that an English Cavalry regiment cannot run. This is
a mistake. I have seen four hundred and thirty-seven sabres flying over
the face of the country in abject terror--have seen the best Regiment
that ever drew bridle, wiped off the Army List for the space of two
hours. If you repeat this tale to the White Hussars they will, in all
probability, treat you severely. They are not proud of the incident.

You may know the White Hussars by their “side,” which is greater than
that of all the Cavalry Regiments on the roster. If this is not a
sufficient mark, you may know them by their old brandy. It has been
sixty years in the Mess and is worth going far to taste. Ask for the
“McGaire” old brandy, and see that you get it. If the Mess Sergeant
thinks that you are uneducated, and that the genuine article will be
lost on you, he will treat you accordingly. He is a good man. But, when
you are at Mess, you must never talk to your hosts about forced marches
or long-distance rides. The Mess are very sensitive; and, if they think
that you are laughing at them, will tell you so.

As the White Hussars say, it was all the Colonel's fault. He was a new
man, and he ought never to have taken the Command. He said that the
Regiment was not smart enough. This to the White Hussars, who knew they
could walk round any Horse and through any Guns, and over any Foot on
the face of the earth! That insult was the first cause of offence.

Then the Colonel cast the Drum-Horse--the Drum-Horse of the White
Hussars! Perhaps you do not see what an unspeakable crime he had
committed. I will try to make it clear. The soul of the Regiment lives
in the Drum-Horse, who carries the silver kettle-drums. He is nearly
always a big piebald Waler. That is a point of honor; and a Regiment
will spend anything you please on a piebald. He is beyond the ordinary
laws of casting. His work is very light, and he only manoeuvres at a
foot-pace. Wherefore, so long as he can step out and look handsome,
his well-being is assured. He knows more about the Regiment than the
Adjutant, and could not make a mistake if he tried.

The Drum-Horse of the White Hussars was only eighteen years old, and
perfectly equal to his duties. He had at least six years' more work in
him, and carried himself with all the pomp and dignity of a Drum-Major
of the Guards. The Regiment had paid Rs. 1,200 for him.

But the Colonel said that he must go, and he was cast in due form and
replaced by a washy, bay beast as ugly as a mule, with a ewe-neck,
rat-tail, and cow-hocks. The Drummer detested that animal, and the best
of the Band-horses put back their ears and showed the whites of their
eyes at the very sight of him. They knew him for an upstart and no
gentleman. I fancy that the Colonel's ideas of smartness extended to
the Band, and that he wanted to make it take part in the regular parade
movements. A Cavalry Band is a sacred thing. It only turns out for
Commanding Officers' parades, and the Band Master is one degree more
important than the Colonel. He is a High Priest and the “Keel Row” is
his holy song. The “Keel Row” is the Cavalry Trot; and the man who has
never heard that tune rising, high and shrill, above the rattle of the
Regiment going past the saluting-base, has something yet to hear and
understand.

When the Colonel cast the Drum-horse of the White Hussars, there was
nearly a mutiny.

The officers were angry, the Regiment were furious, and the Bandsman
swore--like troopers. The Drum-Horse was going to be put up to
auction--public auction--to be bought, perhaps, by a Parsee and put into
a cart! It was worse than exposing the inner life of the Regiment to the
whole world, or selling the Mess Plate to a Jew--a black Jew.

The Colonel was a mean man and a bully. He knew what the Regiment
thought about his action; and, when the troopers offered to buy the
Drum-Horse, he said that their offer was mutinous and forbidden by the
Regulations.

But one of the Subalterns--Hogan-Yale, an Irishman--bought the
Drum-Horse for Rs. 160 at the sale; and the Colonel was wroth. Yale
professed repentance--he was unnaturally submissive--and said that,
as he had only made the purchase to save the horse from possible
ill-treatment and starvation, he would now shoot him and end the
business. This appeared to soothe the Colonel, for he wanted the
Drum-Horse disposed of. He felt that he had made a mistake, and could
not of course acknowledge it. Meantime, the presence of the Drum-Horse
was an annoyance to him.

Yale took to himself a glass of the old brandy, three cheroots, and his
friend, Martyn; and they all left the Mess together. Yale and Martyn
conferred for two hours in Yale's quarters; but only the bull-terrier
who keeps watch over Yale's boot-trees knows what they said. A horse,
hooded and sheeted to his ears, left Yale's stables and was taken, very
unwillingly, into the Civil Lines. Yale's groom went with him. Two men
broke into the Regimental Theatre and took several paint-pots and some
large scenery brushes. Then night fell over the Cantonments, and there
was a noise as of a horse kicking his loose-box to pieces in Yale's
stables. Yale had a big, old, white Waler trap-horse.

The next day was a Thursday, and the men, hearing that Yale was going
to shoot the Drum-Horse in the evening, determined to give the beast a
regular regimental funeral--a finer one than they would have given the
Colonel had he died just then. They got a bullock-cart and some sacking,
and mounds and mounds of roses, and the body, under sacking, was carried
out to the place where the anthrax cases were cremated; two-thirds of
the Regiment followed. There was no Band, but they all sang “The Place
where the old Horse died” as something respectful and appropriate to the
occasion. When the corpse was dumped into the grave and the men began
throwing down armfuls of roses to cover it, the Farrier-Sergeant ripped
out an oath and said aloud:--“Why, it ain't the Drum-Horse any more than
it's me!” The Troop-Sergeant-Majors asked him whether he had left
his head in the Canteen. The Farrier-Sergeant said that he knew the
Drum-Horse's feet as well as he knew his own; but he was silenced
when he saw the regimental number burnt in on the poor stiff, upturned
near-fore.

Thus was the Drum-Horse of the White Hussars buried; the
Farrier-Sergeant grumbling. The sacking that covered the corpse was
smeared in places with black paint; and the Farrier-Sergeant drew
attention to this fact. But the Troop-Sergeant-Major of E Troop kicked
him severely on the shin, and told him that he was undoubtedly drunk.

On the Monday following the burial, the Colonel sought revenge on the
White Hussars. Unfortunately, being at that time temporarily in Command
of the Station, he ordered a Brigade field-day. He said that he wished
to make the regiment “sweat for their damned insolence,” and he carried
out his notion thoroughly. That Monday was one of the hardest days
in the memory of the White Hussars. They were thrown against a
skeleton-enemy, and pushed forward, and withdrawn, and dismounted, and
“scientifically handled” in every possible fashion over dusty country,
till they sweated profusely. Their only amusement came late in the day,
when they fell upon the battery of Horse Artillery and chased it for two
mile's. This was a personal question, and most of the troopers had money
on the event; the Gunners saying openly that they had the legs of the
White Hussars. They were wrong. A march-past concluded the campaign, and
when the Regiment got back to their Lines, the men were coated with dirt
from spur to chin-strap.

The White Hussars have one great and peculiar privilege. They won it at
Fontenoy, I think.

Many Regiments possess special rights, such as wearing collars with
undress uniform, or a bow of ribbon between the shoulders, or red and
white roses in their helmets on certain days of the year. Some
rights are connected with regimental saints, and some with regimental
successes. All are valued highly; but none so highly as the right of
the White Hussars to have the Band playing when their horses are being
watered in the Lines. Only one tune is played, and that tune never
varies. I don't know its real name, but the White Hussars call
it:--“Take me to London again.” It sound's very pretty. The Regiment
would sooner be struck off the roster than forego their distinction.

After the “dismiss” was sounded, the officers rode off home to prepare
for stables; and the men filed into the lines, riding easy. That is to
say, they opened their tight buttons, shifted their helmets, and began
to joke or to swear as the humor took them; the more careful slipping
off and easing girths and curbs. A good trooper values his mount exactly
as much as he values himself, and believes, or should believe, that the
two together are irresistible where women or men, girl's or gun's, are
concerned.

Then the Orderly-Officer gave the order:--“Water horses,” and the
Regiment loafed off to the squadron-troughs, which were in rear of
the stables and between these and the barracks. There were four huge
troughs, one for each squadron, arranged en echelon, so that the whole
Regiment could water in ten minutes if it liked. But it lingered for
seventeen, as a rule, while the Band played.

The band struck up as the squadrons filed off the troughs and the men
slipped their feet out of the stirrups and chaffed each other. The sun
was just setting in a big, hot bed of red cloud, and the road to the
Civil Lines seemed to run straight into the sun's eye. There was a
little dot on the road. It grew and grew till it showed as a horse, with
a sort of gridiron thing on his back. The red cloud glared through the
bars of the gridiron. Some of the troopers shaded their eyes with their
hands and said:--“What the mischief as that there 'orse got on 'im!”

In another minute they heard a neigh that every soul--horse and man--in
the Regiment knew, and saw, heading straight towards the Band, the dead
Drum-Horse of the White Hussars!

On his withers banged and bumped the kettle-drums draped in crape, and
on his back, very stiff and soldierly, sat a bare-headed skeleton.

The band stopped playing, and, for a moment, there was a hush.

Then some one in E troop--men said it was the
Troop-Sergeant-Major--swung his horse round and yelled. No one can
account exactly for what happened afterwards; but it seems that, at
least, one man in each troop set an example of panic, and the rest
followed like sheep. The horses that had barely put their muzzles into
the trough's reared and capered; but, as soon as the Band broke, which
it did when the ghost of the Drum-Horse was about a furlong distant, all
hooves followed suit, and the clatter of the stampede--quite different
from the orderly throb and roar of a movement on parade, or the rough
horse-play of watering in camp--made them only more terrified. They felt
that the men on their backs were afraid of something. When horses once
know THAT, all is over except the butchery.

Troop after troop turned from the troughs and ran--anywhere, and
everywhere--like spit quicksilver. It was a most extraordinary
spectacle, for men and horses were in all stages of easiness, and the
carbine-buckets flopping against their sides urged the horses on. Men
were shouting and cursing, and trying to pull clear of the Band which
was being chased by the Drum-Horse whose rider had fallen forward and
seemed to be spurring for a wager.

The Colonel had gone over to the Mess for a drink. Most of the officers
were with him, and the Subaltern of the Day was preparing to go down
to the lines, and receive the watering reports from the Troop-Sergeant
Majors. When “Take me to London again” stopped, after twenty bars, every
one in the Mess said:--“What on earth has happened?” A minute later,
they heard unmilitary noises, and saw, far across the plain, the White
Hussars scattered, and broken, and flying.

The Colonel was speechless with rage, for he thought that the Regiment
had risen against him or was unanimously drunk. The Band, a disorganized
mob, tore past, and at it's heels labored the Drum-Horse--the dead and
buried Drum-Horse--with the jolting, clattering skeleton. Hogan-Yale
whispered softly to Martyn:--“No wire will stand that treatment,” and
the Band, which had doubled like a hare, came back again. But the rest
of the Regiment was gone, was rioting all over the Province, for the
dusk had shut in and each man was howling to his neighbor that the
Drum-Horse was on his flank. Troop-Horses are far too tenderly treated
as a rule. They can, on emergencies, do a great deal, even with
seventeen stone on their backs. As the troopers found out.

How long this panic lasted I cannot say. I believe that when the moon
rose the men saw they had nothing to fear, and, by twos and threes
and half-troops, crept back into Cantonments very much ashamed of
themselves. Meantime, the Drum-Horse, disgusted at his treatment by
old friends, pulled up, wheeled round, and trotted up to the Mess
verandah-steps for bread. No one liked to run; but no one cared to go
forward till the Colonel made a movement and laid hold of the skeleton's
foot. The Band had halted some distance away, and now came back slowly.
The Colonel called it, individually and collectively, every evil name
that occurred to him at the time; for he had set his hand on the
bosom of the Drum-Horse and found flesh and blood. Then he beat the
kettle-drums with his clenched fist, and discovered that they were but
made of silvered paper and bamboo. Next, still swearing, he tried to
drag the skeleton out of the saddle, but found that it had been wired
into the cantle. The sight of the Colonel, with his arms round the
skeleton's pelvis and his knee in the old Drum-Horse's stomach, was
striking. Not to say amusing. He worried the thing off in a minute or
two, and threw it down on the ground, saying to the Band:--“Here, you
curs, that's what you're afraid of.” The skeleton did not look pretty in
the twilight. The Band-Sergeant seemed to recognize it, for he began to
chuckle and choke. “Shall I take it away, sir?” said the Band-Sergeant.
“Yes,” said the Colonel, “take it to Hell, and ride there yourselves!”

The Band-Sergeant saluted, hoisted the skeleton across his saddle-bow,
and led off to the stables. Then the Colonel began to make inquiries
for the rest of the Regiment, and the language he used was wonderful. He
would disband the Regiment--he would court-martial every soul in it--he
would not command such a set of rabble, and so on, and so on. As the
men dropped in, his language grew wilder, until at last it exceeded the
utmost limits of free speech allowed even to a Colonel of Horse.

Martyn took Hogan-Yale aside and suggested compulsory retirement from
the service as a necessity when all was discovered. Martyn was the
weaker man of the two, Hogan-Yale put up his eyebrows and remarked,
firstly, that he was the son of a Lord, and secondly, that he was
as innocent as the babe unborn of the theatrical resurrection of the
Drum-Horse.

“My instructions,” said Yale, with a singularly sweet smile, “were that
the Drum-Horse should be sent back as impressively as possible. I ask
you, AM I responsible if a mule-headed friend sends him back in such a
manner as to disturb the peace of mind of a regiment of Her Majesty's
Cavalry?”

Martyn said:--“you are a great man and will in time become a General;
but I'd give my chance of a troop to be safe out of this affair.”

Providence saved Martyn and Hogan-Yale. The Second-in-Command led the
Colonel away to the little curtained alcove wherein the subalterns of
the white Hussars were accustomed to play poker of nights; and there,
after many oaths on the Colonel's part, they talked together in low
tones. I fancy that the Second-in-Command must have represented the
scare as the work of some trooper whom it would be hopeless to detect;
and I know that he dwelt upon the sin and the shame of making a public
laughingstock of the scare.

“They will call us,” said the Second-in-Command, who had really a fine
imagination, “they will call us the 'Fly-by-Nights'; they will call us
the 'Ghost Hunters'; they will nickname us from one end of the Army list
to the other. All the explanations in the world won't make outsiders
understand that the officers were away when the panic began. For the
honor of the Regiment and for your own sake keep this thing quiet.”

The Colonel was so exhausted with anger that soothing him down was not
so difficult as might be imagined. He was made to see, gently and by
degrees, that it was obviously impossible to court-martial the whole
Regiment, and equally impossible to proceed against any subaltern who,
in his belief, had any concern in the hoax.

“But the beast's alive! He's never been shot at all!” shouted the
Colonel. “It's flat, flagrant disobedience! I've known a man broke for
less, d----d sight less. They're mocking me, I tell you, Mutman! They're
mocking me!”

Once more, the Second-in-Command set himself to sooth the Colonel,
and wrestled with him for half-an-hour. At the end of that time, the
Regimental Sergeant-Major reported himself. The situation was rather
novel tell to him; but he was not a man to be put out by circumstances.
He saluted and said: “Regiment all come back, Sir.” Then, to propitiate
the Colonel:--“An' none of the horses any the worse, Sir.”

The Colonel only snorted and answered:--“You'd better tuck the men into
their cots, then, and see that they don't wake up and cry in the night.”
 The Sergeant withdrew.

His little stroke of humor pleased the Colonel, and, further, he
felt slightly ashamed of the language he had been using. The
Second-in-Command worried him again, and the two sat talking far into
the night.

Next day but one, there was a Commanding Officer's parade, and the
Colonel harangued the White Hussars vigorously. The pith of his speech
was that, since the Drum-Horse in his old age had proved himself capable
of cutting up the Whole Regiment, he should return to his post of pride
at the head of the band, BUT the Regiment were a set of ruffians with
bad consciences.

The White Hussars shouted, and threw everything movable about them into
the air, and when the parade was over, they cheered the Colonel till
they couldn't speak. No cheers were put up for Lieutenant Hogan-Yale,
who smiled very sweetly in the background.

Said the Second-in-Command to the Colonel, unofficially:--“These little
things ensure popularity, and do not the least affect discipline.”

“But I went back on my word,” said the Colonel.

“Never mind,” said the Second-in-Command. “The White Hussars will follow
you anywhere from to-day. Regiment's are just like women. They will do
anything for trinketry.”

A week later, Hogan-Yale received an extraordinary letter from some one
who signed himself “Secretary Charity and Zeal, 3709, E. C.,” and asked
for “the return of our skeleton which we have reason to believe is in
your possession.”

“Who the deuce is this lunatic who trades in bones?” said Hogan-Yale.

“Beg your pardon, Sir,” said the Band-Sergeant, “but the skeleton is
with me, an' I'll return it if you'll pay the carriage into the Civil
Lines. There's a coffin with it, Sir.”

Hogan-Yale smiled and handed two rupees to the Band-Sergeant,
saying:--“Write the date on the skull, will you?”

If you doubt this story, and know where to go, you can see the date on
the skeleton. But don't mention the matter to the White Hussars.

I happen to know something about it, because I prepared the Drum-Horse
for his resurrection. He did not take kindly to the skeleton at all.




THE BRONCKHORST DIVORCE-CASE.


     In the daytime, when she moved about me,
       In the night, when she was sleeping at my side,--
     I was wearied, I was wearied of her presence.
     Day by day and night by night I grew to hate her--
       Would to God that she or I had died!

                                      Confessions.


There was a man called Bronckhorst--a three-cornered, middle-aged man
in the Army--gray as a badger, and, some people said, with a touch of
country-blood in him. That, however, cannot be proved. Mrs. Bronckhorst
was not exactly young, though fifteen years younger than her husband.
She was a large, pale, quiet woman, with heavy eyelids, over weak eyes,
and hair that turned red or yellow as the lights fell on it.

Bronckhorst was not nice in any way. He had no respect for the pretty
public and private lies that make life a little less nasty than it is.
His manner towards his wife was coarse. There are many things--including
actual assault with the clenched fist--that a wife will endure; but
seldom a wife can bear--as Mrs. Bronckhorst bore--with a long course of
brutal, hard chaff, making light of her weaknesses, her headaches, her
small fits of gayety, her dresses, her queer little attempts to make
herself attractive to her husband when she knows that she is not
what she has been, and--worst of all--the love that she spends on her
children. That particular sort of heavy-handed jest was specially dear
to Bronckhorst. I suppose that he had first slipped into it, meaning
no harm, in the honeymoon, when folk find their ordinary stock of
endearments run short, and so go to the other extreme to express their
feelings. A similar impulse make's a man say:--“Hutt, you old beast!”
 when a favorite horse nuzzles his coat-front. Unluckily, when the
reaction of marriage sets in, the form of speech remains, and, the
tenderness having died out, hurts the wife more than she cares to say.
But Mrs. Bronckhorst was devoted to her “teddy,” as she called him.
Perhaps that was why he objected to her. Perhaps--this is only a theory
to account for his infamous behavior later on--he gave way to the queer
savage feeling that sometimes takes by the throat a husband twenty
years' married, when he sees, across the table, the same face of
his wedded wife, and knows that, as he has sat facing it, so must he
continue to sit until day of its death or his own. Most men and all
women know the spasm. It only lasts for three breaths as a rule, must be
a “throw-back” to times when men and women were rather worse than they
are now, and is too unpleasant to be discussed.

Dinner at the Bronckhorst's was an infliction few men cared to undergo.
Bronckhorst took a pleasure in saying things that made his wife wince.
When their little boy came in at dessert, Bronckhorst used to give him
half a glass of wine, and naturally enough, the poor little mite got
first riotous, next miserable, and was removed screaming. Bronckhorst
asked if that was the way Teddy usually behaved, and whether Mrs.
Bronckhorst could not spare some of her time to teach the “little beggar
decency.” Mrs. Bronckhorst, who loved the boy more than her own life,
tried not to cry--her spirit seemed to have been broken by her marriage.
Lastly, Bronckhorst used to say:--“There! That'll do, that'll do.
For God's sake try to behave like a rational woman. Go into the
drawing-room.” Mrs. Bronckhorst would go, trying to carry it all
off with a smile; and the guest of the evening would feel angry and
uncomfortable.

After three years of this cheerful life--for Mrs. Bronckhorst had no
woman-friends to talk to--the Station was startled by the news that
Bronckhorst had instituted proceedings ON THE CRIMINAL COUNT, against
a man called Biel, who certainly had been rather attentive to Mrs.
Bronckhorst whenever she had appeared in public. The utter want of
reserve with which Bronckhorst treated his own dishonor helped us to
know that the evidence against Biel would be entirely circumstantial and
native. There were no letters; but Bronckhorst said openly that he would
rack Heaven and Earth until he saw Biel superintending the manufacture
of carpets in the Central Jail. Mrs. Bronckhorst kept entirely to her
house, and let charitable folks say what they pleased. Opinions were
divided. Some two-thirds of the Station jumped at once to the conclusion
that Biel was guilty; but a dozen men who knew and liked him held by
him. Biel was furious and surprised. He denied the whole thing, and
vowed that he would thrash Bronckhorst within an inch of his life.
No jury, we knew, could convict a man on the criminal count on native
evidence in a land where you can buy a murder-charge, including the
corpse, all complete for fifty-four rupees; but Biel did not care to
scrape through by the benefit of a doubt. He wanted the whole thing
cleared: but as he said one night:--“He can prove anything with
servants' evidence, and I've only my bare word.” This was about a month
before the case came on; and beyond agreeing with Biel, we could do
little. All that we could be sure of was that the native evidence would
be bad enough to blast Biel's character for the rest of his service; for
when a native begins perjury he perjures himself thoroughly. He does not
boggle over details.

Some genius at the end of the table whereat the affair was being talked
over, said:--“Look here! I don't believe lawyers are any good. Get a man
to wire to Strickland, and beg him to come down and pull us through.”

Strickland was about a hundred and eighty miles up the line. He had
not long been married to Miss Youghal, but he scented in the telegram a
chance of return to the old detective work that his soul lusted after,
and next night he came in and heard our story. He finished his pipe and
said oracularly:--“we must get at the evidence. Oorya bearer, Mussalman
khit and methraniayah, I suppose, are the pillars of the charge. I am on
in this piece; but I'm afraid I'm getting rusty in my talk.”

He rose and went into Biel's bedroom where his trunk had been put, and
shut the door. An hour later, we heard him say:--“I hadn't the heart
to part with my old makeups when I married. Will this do?” There was a
lothely faquir salaaming in the doorway.

“Now lend me fifty rupees,” said Strickland, “and give me your Words of
Honor that you won't tell my Wife.”

He got all that he asked for, and left the house while the table drank
his health. What he did only he himself knows. A faquir hung about
Bronckhorst's compound for twelve days. Then a mehter appeared, and when
Biel heard of HIM, he said that Strickland was an angel full-fledged.
Whether the mehter made love to Janki, Mrs. Bronckhorst's ayah, is a
question which concerns Strickland exclusively.

He came back at the end of three weeks, and said quietly:--“You spoke
the truth, Biel. The whole business is put up from beginning to end.
Jove! It almost astonishes ME! That Bronckhorst-beast isn't fit to
live.”

There was uproar and shouting, and Biel said:--“How are you going to
prove it? You can't say that you've been trespassing on Bronckhorst's
compound in disguise!”

“No,” said Strickland. “Tell your lawyer-fool, whoever he is, to get up
something strong about 'inherent improbabilities' and 'discrepancies of
evidence.' He won't have to speak, but it will make him happy. I'M going
to run this business.”

Biel held his tongue, and the other men waited to see what would happen.
They trusted Strickland as men trust quiet men. When the case came off
the Court was crowded. Strickland hung about in the verandah of the
Court, till he met the Mohammedan khitmatgar. Then he murmured a
faquir's blessing in his ear, and asked him how his second wife did. The
man spun round, and, as he looked into the eyes of “Estreeken Sahib,”
 his jaw dropped. You must remember that before Strickland was married,
he was, as I have told you already, a power among natives. Strickland
whispered a rather coarse vernacular proverb to the effect that he was
abreast of all that was going on, and went into the Court armed with a
gut trainer's-whip.

The Mohammedan was the first witness and Strickland beamed upon him from
the back of the Court. The man moistened his lips with his tongue and,
in his abject fear of “Estreeken Sahib” the faquir, went back on every
detail of his evidence--said he was a poor man and God was his witness
that he had forgotten every thing that Bronckhorst Sahib had told him
to say. Between his terror of Strickland, the Judge, and Bronckhorst he
collapsed, weeping.

Then began the panic among the witnesses. Janki, the ayah, leering
chastely behind her veil, turned gray, and the bearer left the Court. He
said that his Mamma was dying and that it was not wholesome for any man
to lie unthriftily in the presence of “Estreeken Sahib.”

Biel said politely to Bronckhorst:--“Your witnesses don't seem to work.
Haven't you any forged letters to produce?” But Bronckhorst was swaying
to and fro in his chair, and there was a dead pause after Biel had been
called to order.

Bronckhorst's Counsel saw the look on his client's face, and without
more ado, pitched his papers on the little green baize table, and
mumbled something about having been misinformed. The whole Court
applauded wildly, like soldiers at a theatre, and the Judge began to say
what he thought.

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

Biel came out of the place, and Strickland dropped a gut trainer's-whip
in the verandah. Ten minutes later, Biel was cutting Bronckhorst into
ribbons behind the old Court cells, quietly and without scandal. What
was left of Bronckhorst was sent home in a carriage; and his wife wept
over it and nursed it into a man again.

Later on, after Biel had managed to hush up the counter-charge against
Bronckhorst of fabricating false evidence, Mrs. Bronckhorst, with her
faint watery smile, said that there had been a mistake, but it wasn't
her Teddy's fault altogether. She would wait till her Teddy came back to
her. Perhaps he had grown tired of her, or she had tried his patience,
and perhaps we wouldn't cut her any more, and perhaps the mothers would
let their children play with “little Teddy” again. He was so lonely.
Then the Station invited Mrs. Bronckhorst everywhere, until Bronckhorst
was fit to appear in public, when he went Home and took his wife with
him. According to the latest advices, her Teddy did “come back to her,”
 and they are moderately happy. Though, of course, he can never forgive
her the thrashing that she was the indirect means of getting for him.

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

What Biel wants to know is:--“Why didn't I press home the charge against
the Bronckhorst-brute, and have him run in?”

What Mrs. Strickland wants to know is:--“How DID my husband bring such
a lovely, lovely Waler from your Station? I know ALL his money-affairs;
and I'm CERTAIN he didn't BUY it.”

What I want to know is:--“How do women like Mrs. Bronckhorst come to
marry men like Bronckhorst?”

And my conundrum is the most unanswerable of the three.




VENUS ANNODOMINI.


     And the years went on as the years must do;
     But our great Diana was always new--
     Fresh, and blooming, and blonde, and fair,
     With azure eyes and with aureate hair;
     And all the folk, as they came or went,
     Offered her praise to her heart's content.

                              Diana of Ephesus.


She had nothing to do with Number Eighteen in the Braccio Nuovo of
the Vatican, between Visconti's Ceres and the God of the Nile. She was
purely an Indian deity--an Anglo-Indian deity, that is to say--and
we called her THE Venus Annodomini, to distinguish her from other
Annodominis of the same everlasting order. There was a legend among the
Hills that she had once been young; but no living man was prepared to
come forward and say boldly that the legend was true. Men rode up to
Simla, and stayed, and went away and made their name and did their
life's work, and returned again to find the Venus Annodomini exactly as
they had left her. She was as immutable as the Hills. But not quite
so green. All that a girl of eighteen could do in the way of riding,
walking, dancing, picnicking and over-exertion generally, the Venus
Annodomini did, and showed no sign of fatigue or trace of weariness.
Besides perpetual youth, she had discovered, men said, the secret of
perpetual health; and her fame spread about the land. From a mere woman,
she grew to be an Institution, insomuch that no young man could be said
to be properly formed, who had not, at some time or another, worshipped
at the shrine of the Venus Annodomini. There was no one like her, though
there were many imitations. Six years in her eyes were no more than six
months to ordinary women; and ten made less visible impression on her
than does a week's fever on an ordinary woman. Every one adored her, and
in return she was pleasant and courteous to nearly every one. Youth had
been a habit of hers for so long, that she could not part with it--never
realized, in fact, the necessity of parting with it--and took for her
more chosen associates young people.

Among the worshippers of the Venus Annodomini was young Gayerson.
“Very Young” Gayerson, he was called to distinguish him from his father
“Young” Gayerson, a Bengal Civilian, who affected the customs--as he had
the heart--of youth. “Very Young” Gayerson was not content to worship
placidly and for form's sake, as the other young men did, or to accept
a ride or a dance, or a talk from the Venus Annodomini in a properly
humble and thankful spirit. He was exacting, and, therefore, the Venus
Annodomini repressed him. He worried himself nearly sick in a futile
sort of way over her; and his devotion and earnestness made him appear
either shy or boisterous or rude, as his mood might vary, by the side of
the older men who, with him, bowed before the Venus Annodomini. She was
sorry for him. He reminded her of a lad who, three-and-twenty years ago,
had professed a boundless devotion for her, and for whom in return she
had felt something more than a week's weakness. But that lad had fallen
away and married another woman less than a year after he had worshipped
her; and the Venus Annodomini had almost--not quite--forgotten his name.
“Very Young” Gayerson had the same big blue eyes and the same way of
pouting his underlip when he was excited or troubled. But the Venus
Annodomini checked him sternly none the less. Too much zeal was a thing
that she did not approve of; preferring instead, a tempered and sober
tenderness.

“Very Young” Gayerson was miserable, and took no trouble to conceal his
wretchedness. He was in the Army--a Line regiment I think, but am not
certain--and, since his face was a looking-glass and his forehead an
open book, by reason of his innocence, his brothers in arms made his
life a burden to him and embittered his naturally sweet disposition. No
one except “Very Young” Gayerson, and he never told his views, knew how
old “Very Young” Gayerson believed the Venus Annodomini to be. Perhaps
he thought her five and twenty, or perhaps she told him that she was
this age. “Very Young” Gayerson would have forded the Gugger in flood to
carry her lightest word, and had implicit faith in her. Every one liked
him, and every one was sorry when they saw him so bound a slave of the
Venus Annodomini. Every one, too, admitted that it was not her fault;
for the Venus Annodomini differed from Mrs. Hauksbee and Mrs. Reiver in
this particular--she never moved a finger to attract any one; but, like
Ninon de l'Enclos, all men were attracted to her. One could admire and
respect Mrs. Hauksbee, despise and avoid Mrs. Reiver, but one was forced
to adore the Venus Annodomini.

“Very Young” Gayerson's papa held a Division or a Collectorate
or something administrative in a particularly unpleasant part of
Bengal--full of Babus who edited newspapers proving that “Young”
 Gayerson was a “Nero” and a “Scylla” and a “Charybdis”; and, in addition
to the Babus, there was a good deal of dysentery and cholera abroad
for nine months of the year. “Young” Gayerson--he was about five and
forty--rather liked Babus, they amused him, but he objects to dysentery,
and when he could get away, went to Darjilling for the most part. This
particular season he fancied that he would come up to Simla, and see his
boy. The boy was not altogether pleased. He told the Venus Annodomini
that his father was coming up, and she flushed a little and said that
she should be delighted to make his acquaintance. Then she looked long
and thoughtfully at “Very Young” Gayerson; because she was very, very
sorry for him, and he was a very, very big idiot.

“My daughter is coming out in a fortnight, Mr. Gayerson,” she said.

“Your WHAT?” said he.

“Daughter,” said the Venus Annodomini. “She's been out for a year at
Home already, and I want her to see a little of India. She is nineteen
and a very sensible, nice girl I believe.”

“Very Young” Gayerson, who was a short twenty-two years old, nearly fell
out of his chair with astonishment; for he had persisted in believing,
against all belief, in the youth of the Venus Annodomini. She, with her
back to the curtained window, watched the effect of her sentences and
smiled.

“Very Young” Gayerson's papa came up twelve days later, and had not been
in Simla four and twenty hours, before two men, old acquaintances of
his, had told him how “Very Young” Gayerson had been conducting himself.

“Young” Gayerson laughed a good deal, and inquired who the Venus
Annodomini might be. Which proves that he had been living in Bengal
where nobody knows anything except the rate of Exchange. Then he said
“boys will be boys,” and spoke to his son about the matter. “Very Young”
 Gayerson said that he felt wretched and unhappy; and “Young” Gayerson
said that he repented of having helped to bring a fool into the world.
He suggested that his son had better cut his leave short and go down to
his duties. This led to an unfilial answer, and relations were strained,
until “Young” Gayerson demmanded that they should call on the Venus
Annodomini. “Very Young” Gayerson went with his papa, feeling, somehow,
uncomfortable and small.

The Venus Annodomini received them graciously and “Young” Gayerson
said:--“By Jove! It's Kitty!” “Very Young” Gayerson would have listened
for an explanation, if his time had not been taken up with trying to
talk to a large, handsome, quiet, well-dressed girl--introduced to him
by the Venus Annodomini as her daughter. She was far older in manners,
style and repose than “Very Young” Gayerson; and, as he realized this
thing, he felt sick.

Presently, he heard the Venus Annodomini saying:--“Do you know that your
son is one of my most devoted admirers?”

“I don't wonder,” said “Young” Gayerson. Here he raised his voice:--“He
follows his father's footsteps. Didn't I worship the ground you trod on,
ever so long ago, Kitty--and you haven't changed since then. How strange
it all seems!”

“Very Young” Gayerson said nothing. His conversation with the daughter
of the Venus Annodomini was, through the rest of the call, fragmentary
and disjointed.

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

“At five, to-morrow then,” said the Venus Annodomini. “And mind you are
punctual.”

“At five punctual,” said “Young” Gayerson. “You can lend your old father
a horse I dare say, youngster, can't you? I'm going for a ride tomorrow
afternoon.”

“Certainly,” said “Very Young” Gayerson. “I am going down to-morrow
morning. My ponies are at your service, Sir.”

The Venus Annodomini looked at him across the half-light of the room,
and her big gray eyes filled with moisture. She rose and shook hands
with him.

“Good-bye, Tom,” whispered the Venus Annodomini.




THE BISARA OF POOREE.


     Little Blind Fish, thou art marvellous wise,
     Little Blind Fish, who put out thy eyes?
     Open thine ears while I whisper my wish--
     Bring me a lover, thou little Blind Fish.

                      The Charm of the Bisara.


Some natives say that it came from the other side of Kulu, where
the eleven-inch Temple Sapphire is. Others that it was made at the
Devil-Shrine of Ao-Chung in Thibet, was stolen by a Kafir, from him by
a Gurkha, from him again by a Lahouli, from him by a khitmatgar, and by
this latter sold to an Englishman, so all its virtue was lost: because,
to work properly, the Bisara of Pooree must be stolen--with bloodshed if
possible, but, at any rate, stolen.

These stories of the coming into India are all false. It was made at
Pooree ages since--the manner of its making would fill a small book--was
stolen by one of the Temple dancing-girls there, for her own purposes,
and then passed on from hand to hand, steadily northward, till it
reached Hanla: always bearing the same name--the Bisara of Pooree. In
shape it is a tiny, square box of silver, studded outside with eight
small balas-rubies. Inside the box, which opens with a spring, is
a little eyeless fish, carved from some sort of dark, shiny nut and
wrapped in a shred of faded gold-cloth. That is the Bisara of Pooree,
and it were better for a man to take a king cobra in his hand than to
touch the Bisara of Pooree.

All kinds of magic are out of date and done away with except in India
where nothing changes in spite of the shiny, toy-scum stuff that people
call “civilization.” Any man who knows about the Bisara of Pooree will
tell you what its powers are--always supposing that it has been honestly
stolen. It is the only regularly working, trustworthy love-charm in the
country, with one exception.

[The other charm is in the hands of a trooper of the Nizam's Horse, at a
place called Tuprani, due north of Hyderabad.] This can be depended upon
for a fact. Some one else may explain it.

If the Bisara be not stolen, but given or bought or found, it turns
against its owner in three years, and leads to ruin or death. This is
another fact which you may explain when you have time. Meanwhile, you
can laugh at it. At present, the Bisara is safe on an ekka-pony's
neck, inside the blue bead-necklace that keeps off the Evil-eye. If the
ekka-driver ever finds it, and wears it, or gives it to his wife, I am
sorry for him.

A very dirty hill-cooly woman, with goitre, owned it at Theog in 1884.
It came into Simla from the north before Churton's khitmatgar bought it,
and sold it, for three times its silver-value, to Churton, who collected
curiosities. The servant knew no more what he had bought than
the master; but a man looking over Churton's collection of
curiosities--Churton was an Assistant Commissioner by the way--saw and
held his tongue. He was an Englishman; but knew how to believe. Which
shows that he was different from most Englishmen. He knew that it was
dangerous to have any share in the little box when working or dormant;
for unsought Love is a terrible gift.

Pack--“Grubby” Pack, as we used to call him--was, in every way, a nasty
little man who must have crawled into the Army by mistake. He was three
inches taller than his sword, but not half so strong. And the sword was
a fifty-shilling, tailor-made one. Nobody liked him, and, I suppose, it
was his wizenedness and worthlessness that made him fall so hopelessly
in love with Miss Hollis, who was good and sweet, and five foot seven in
her tennis shoes. He was not content with falling in love quietly,
but brought all the strength of his miserable little nature into the
business. If he had not been so objectionable, one might have pitied
him. He vapored, and fretted, and fumed, and trotted up and down, and
tried to make himself pleasing in Miss Hollis's big, quiet, gray eyes,
and failed. It was one of the cases that you sometimes meet, even in
this country where we marry by Code, of a really blind attachment all on
one side, without the faintest possibility of return. Miss Hollis
looked on Pack as some sort of vermin running about the road. He had
no prospects beyond Captain's pay, and no wits to help that out by one
anna. In a large-sized man, love like his would have been touching. In
a good man it would have been grand. He being what he was, it was only a
nuisance.

You will believe this much. What you will not believe, is what follows:
Churton, and The Man who Knew that the Bisara was, were lunching at the
Simla Club together. Churton was complaining of life in general. His
best mare had rolled out of stable down the hill and had broken her
back; his decisions were being reversed by the upper Courts, more
than an Assistant Commissioner of eight years' standing has a right to
expect; he knew liver and fever, and, for weeks past, had felt out of
sorts. Altogether, he was disgusted and disheartened.

Simla Club dining-room is built, as all the world knows, in two
sections, with an arch-arrangement dividing them. Come in, turn to your
own left, take the table under the window, and you cannot see any one
who has come in, turning to the right, and taken a table on the right
side of the arch. Curiously enough, every word that you say can be
heard, not only by the other diner, but by the servants beyond the
screen through which they bring dinner. This is worth knowing: an
echoing-room is a trap to be forewarned against.

Half in fun, and half hoping to be believed, The Man who Knew told
Churton the story of the Bisara of Pooree at rather greater length than
I have told it to you in this place; winding up with the suggestion that
Churton might as well throw the little box down the hill and see whether
all his troubles would go with it. In ordinary ears, English ears, the
tale was only an interesting bit of folk-lore. Churton laughed,
said that he felt better for his tiffin, and went out. Pack had been
tiffining by himself to the right of the arch, and had heard everything.
He was nearly mad with his absurd infatuation for Miss Hollis that all
Simla had been laughing about.

It is a curious thing that, when a man hates or loves beyond reason, he
is ready to go beyond reason to gratify his feelings. Which he would not
do for money or power merely. Depend upon it, Solomon would never have
built altars to Ashtaroth and all those ladies with queer names, if
there had not been trouble of some kind in his zenana, and nowhere else.
But this is beside the story. The facts of the case are these: Pack
called on Churton next day when Churton was out, left his card, and
STOLE the Bisara of Pooree from its place under the clock on the
mantelpiece! Stole it like the thief he was by nature. Three days later,
all Simla was electrified by the news that Miss Hollis had accepted
Pack--the shrivelled rat, Pack! Do you desire clearer evidence than
this? The Bisara of Pooree had been stolen, and it worked as it had
always done when won by foul means.

There are three or four times in a man's life-when he is justified in
meddling with other people's affairs to play Providence.

The Man who Knew felt that he WAS justified; but believing and acting on
a belief are quite different things. The insolent satisfaction of Pack
as he ambled by the side of Miss Hollis, and Churton's striking release
from liver, as soon as the Bisara of Pooree had gone, decided the Man.
He explained to Churton and Churton laughed, because he was not brought
up to believe that men on the Government House List steal--at least
little things. But the miraculous acceptance by Miss Hollis of that
tailor, Pack, decided him to take steps on suspicion. He vowed that he
only wanted to find out where his ruby-studded silver box had vanished
to. You cannot accuse a man on the Government House List of stealing.
And if you rifle his room you are a thief yourself. Churton, prompted
by The Man who Knew, decided on burglary. If he found nothing in Pack's
room.... but it is not nice to think of what would have happened in that
case.

Pack went to a dance at Benmore--Benmore WAS Benmore in those days, and
not an office--and danced fifteen waltzes out of twenty-two with Miss
Hollis. Churton and The Man took all the keys that they could lay hands
on, and went to Pack's room in the hotel, certain that his servants
would be away. Pack was a cheap soul. He had not purchased a decent
cash-box to keep his papers in, but one of those native imitations that
you buy for ten rupees. It opened to any sort of key, and there at the
bottom, under Pack's Insurance Policy, lay the Bisara of Pooree!

Churton called Pack names, put the Bisara of Pooree in his pocket, and
went to the dance with The Man. At least, he came in time for supper,
and saw the beginning of the end in Miss Hollis's eyes. She was
hysterical after supper, and was taken away by her Mamma.

At the dance, with the abominable Bisara in his pocket, Churton twisted
his foot on one of the steps leading down to the old Rink, and had to be
sent home in a rickshaw, grumbling. He did not believe in the Bisara of
Pooree any the more for this manifestation, but he sought out Pack and
called him some ugly names; and “thief” was the mildest of them. Pack
took the names with the nervous smile of a little man who wants both
soul and body to resent an insult, and went his way. There was no public
scandal.

A week later, Pack got his definite dismissal from Miss Hollis. There
had been a mistake in the placing of her affections, she said. So he
went away to Madras, where he can do no great harm even if he lives to
be a Colonel.

Churton insisted upon The Man who Knew taking the Bisara of Pooree as a
gift. The Man took it, went down to the Cart Road at once, found an ekka
pony with a blue head-necklace, fastened the Bisara of Pooree inside the
necklace with a piece of shoe-string and thanked Heaven that he was
rid of a danger. Remember, in case you ever find it, that you must not
destroy the Bisara of Pooree. I have not time to explain why just now,
but the power lies in the little wooden fish. Mister Gubernatis or Max
Muller could tell you more about it than I.

You will say that all this story is made up. Very well. If ever you come
across a little silver, ruby-studded box, seven-eighths of an inch long
by three-quarters wide, with a dark-brown wooden fish, wrapped in gold
cloth, inside it, keep it. Keep it for three years, and then you will
discover for yourself whether my story is true or false.

Better still, steal it as Pack did, and you will be sorry that you had
not killed yourself in the beginning.




THE GATE OF A HUNDRED SORROWS.


  “If I can attain Heaven for a pice, why should you be envious?”

                                        Opium Smoker's Proverb.


This is no work of mine. My friend, Gabral Misquitta, the half-caste,
spoke it all, between moonset and morning, six weeks before he died; and
I took it down from his mouth as he answered my questions so:--

It lies between the Copper-smith's Gully and the pipe-stem sellers'
quarter, within a hundred yards, too, as the crow flies, of the Mosque
of Wazir Khan. I don't mind telling any one this much, but I defy him
to find the Gate, however well he may think he knows the City. You might
even go through the very gully it stands in a hundred times, and be none
the wiser. We used to call the gully, “the Gully of the Black Smoke,”
 but its native name is altogether different of course. A loaded donkey
couldn't pass between the walls; and, at one point, just before you
reach the Gate, a bulged house-front makes people go along all sideways.

It isn't really a gate though. It's a house. Old Fung-Tching had it
first five years ago. He was a boot-maker in Calcutta. They say that
he murdered his wife there when he was drunk. That was why he dropped
bazar-rum and took to the Black Smoke instead. Later on, he came up
north and opened the Gate as a house where you could get your smoke in
peace and quiet. Mind you, it was a pukka, respectable opium-house, and
not one of those stifling, sweltering chandoo-khanas, that you can find
all over the City. No; the old man knew his business thoroughly, and he
was most clean for a Chinaman. He was a one-eyed little chap, not much
more than five feet high, and both his middle fingers were gone. All the
same, he was the handiest man at rolling black pills I have ever seen.
Never seemed to be touched by the Smoke, either; and what he took day
and night, night and day, was a caution. I've been at it five years, and
I can do my fair share of the Smoke with any one; but I was a child to
Fung-Tching that way. All the same, the old man was keen on his money,
very keen; and that's what I can't understand. I heard he saved a good
deal before he died, but his nephew has got all that now; and the old
man's gone back to China to be buried.

He kept the big upper room, where his best customers gathered, as neat
as a new pin. In one corner used to stand Fung-Tching's Joss--almost
as ugly as Fung-Tching--and there were always sticks burning under his
nose; but you never smelt 'em when the pipes were going thick. Opposite
the Joss was Fung-Tching's coffin. He had spent a good deal of his
savings on that, and whenever a new man came to the Gate he was always
introduced to it. It was lacquered black, with red and gold writings
on it, and I've heard that Fung-Tching brought it out all the way from
China. I don't know whether that's true or not, but I know that, if I
came first in the evening, I used to spread my mat just at the foot of
it. It was a quiet corner you see, and a sort of breeze from the gully
came in at the window now and then. Besides the mats, there was no other
furniture in the room--only the coffin, and the old Joss all green and
blue and purple with age and polish.

Fung-Tching never told us why he called the place “The Gate of a Hundred
Sorrows.” (He was the only Chinaman I know who used bad-sounding fancy
names. Most of them are flowery. As you'll see in Calcutta.) We used
to find that out for ourselves. Nothing grows on you so much, if you're
white, as the Black Smoke. A yellow man is made different. Opium doesn't
tell on him scarcely at all; but white and black suffer a good deal. Of
course, there are some people that the Smoke doesn't touch any more than
tobacco would at first. They just doze a bit, as one would fall asleep
naturally, and next morning they are almost fit for work. Now, I was
one of that sort when I began, but I've been at it for five years pretty
steadily, and its different now. There was an old aunt of mine, down
Agra way, and she left me a little at her death. About sixty rupees a
month secured. Sixty isn't much. I can recollect a time, seems hundreds
and hundreds of years ago, that I was getting my three hundred a month,
and pickings, when I was working on a big timber contract in Calcutta.

I didn't stick to that work for long. The Black Smoke does not allow of
much other business; and even though I am very little affected by it, as
men go, I couldn't do a day's work now to save my life. After all, sixty
rupees is what I want. When old Fung-Tching was alive he used to draw
the money for me, give me about half of it to live on (I eat very
little), and the rest he kept himself. I was free of the Gate at any
time of the day and night, and could smoke and sleep there when I liked,
so I didn't care. I know the old man made a good thing out of it; but
that's no matter. Nothing matters much to me; and, besides, the money
always came fresh and fresh each month.

There was ten of us met at the Gate when the place was first opened. Me,
and two Baboos from a Government Office somewhere in Anarkulli, but they
got the sack and couldn't pay (no man who has to work in the daylight
can do the Black Smoke for any length of time straight on); a Chinaman
that was Fung-Tching's nephew; a bazar-woman that had got a lot of
money somehow; an English loafer--Mac-Somebody I think, but I have
forgotten--that smoked heaps, but never seemed to pay anything (they
said he had saved Fung-Tching's life at some trial in Calcutta when
he was a barrister): another Eurasian, like myself, from Madras; a
half-caste woman, and a couple of men who said they had come from the
North. I think they must have been Persians or Afghans or something.
There are not more than five of us living now, but we come regular. I
don't know what happened to the Baboos; but the bazar-woman she died
after six months of the Gate, and I think Fung-Tching took her bangles
and nose-ring for himself. But I'm not certain. The Englishman, he drank
as well as smoked, and he dropped off. One of the Persians got killed in
a row at night by the big well near the mosque a long time ago, and the
Police shut up the well, because they said it was full of foul air. They
found him dead at the bottom of it. So, you see, there is only me, the
Chinaman, the half-caste woman that we call the Memsahib (she used to
live with Fung-Tching), the other Eurasian, and one of the Persians. The
Memsahib looks very old now. I think she was a young woman when the
Gate was opened; but we are all old for the matter of that. Hundreds
and hundreds of years old. It is very hard to keep count of time in the
Gate, and besides, time doesn't matter to me. I draw my sixty rupees
fresh and fresh every month. A very, very long while ago, when I used
to be getting three hundred and fifty rupees a month, and pickings, on
a big timber-contract at Calcutta, I had a wife of sorts. But she's dead
now. People said that I killed her by taking to the Black Smoke. Perhaps
I did, but it's so long since it doesn't matter. Sometimes when I first
came to the Gate, I used to feel sorry for it; but that's all over and
done with long ago, and I draw my sixty rupees fresh and fresh every
month, and am quite happy. Not DRUNK happy, you know, but always quiet
and soothed and contented.

How did I take to it? It began at Calcutta. I used to try it in my own
house, just to see what it was like. I never went very far, but I think
my wife must have died then. Anyhow, I found myself here, and got to
know Fung-Tching. I don't remember rightly how that came about; but he
told me of the Gate and I used to go there, and, somehow, I have never
got away from it since. Mind you, though, the Gate was a respectable
place in Fung-Tching's time where you could be comfortable, and not at
all like the chandoo-khanas where the niggers go. No; it was clean and
quiet, and not crowded. Of course, there were others beside us ten
and the man; but we always had a mat apiece with a wadded woollen
head-piece, all covered with black and red dragons and things; just like
a coffin in the corner.

At the end of one's third pipe the dragons used to move about and fight.
I've watched 'em, many and many a night through. I used to regulate
my Smoke that way, and now it takes a dozen pipes to make 'em stir.
Besides, they are all torn and dirty, like the mats, and old Fung-Tching
is dead. He died a couple of years ago, and gave me the pipe I always
use now--a silver one, with queer beasts crawling up and down the
receiver-bottle below the cup. Before that, I think, I used a big bamboo
stem with a copper cup, a very small one, and a green jade mouthpiece.
It was a little thicker than a walking-stick stem, and smoked sweet,
very sweet. The bamboo seemed to suck up the smoke. Silver doesn't, and
I've got to clean it out now and then, that's a great deal of trouble,
but I smoke it for the old man's sake. He must have made a good thing
out of me, but he always gave me clean mats and pillows, and the best
stuff you could get anywhere.

When he died, his nephew Tsin-ling took up the Gate, and he called it
the “Temple of the Three Possessions;” but we old ones speak of it
as the “Hundred Sorrows,” all the same. The nephew does things very
shabbily, and I think the Memsahib must help him. She lives with him;
same as she used to do with the old man. The two let in all sorts of low
people, niggers and all, and the Black Smoke isn't as good as it used
to be. I've found burnt bran in my pipe over and over again. The old man
would have died if that had happened in his time. Besides, the room
is never cleaned, and all the mats are torn and cut at the edges. The
coffin has gone--gone to China again--with the old man and two ounces of
smoke inside it, in case he should want 'em on the way.

The Joss doesn't get so many sticks burnt under his nose as he used to;
that's a sign of ill-luck, as sure as Death. He's all brown, too, and
no one ever attends to him. That's the Memsahib's work, I know; because,
when Tsin-ling tried to burn gilt paper before him, she said it was a
waste of money, and, if he kept a stick burning very slowly, the Joss
wouldn't know the difference. So now we've got the sticks mixed with
a lot of glue, and they take half-an-hour longer to burn, and smell
stinky. Let alone the smell of the room by itself. No business can get
on if they try that sort of thing. The Joss doesn't like it. I can see
that. Late at night, sometimes, he turns all sorts of queer colors--blue
and green and red--just as he used to do when old Fung-Tching was alive;
and he rolls his eyes and stamps his feet like a devil.

I don't know why I don't leave the place and smoke quietly in a little
room of my own in the bazar. Most like, Tsin-ling would kill me if
I went away--he draws my sixty rupees now--and besides, it's so much
trouble, and I've grown to be very fond of the Gate. It's not much to
look at. Not what it was in the old man's time, but I couldn't leave it.
I've seen so many come in and out. And I've seen so many die here on the
mats that I should be afraid of dying in the open now. I've seen some
things that people would call strange enough; but nothing is strange
when you're on the Black Smoke, except the Black Smoke. And if it was,
it wouldn't matter. Fung-Tching used to be very particular about his
people, and never got in any one who'd give trouble by dying messy and
such. But the nephew isn't half so careful. He tells everywhere that he
keeps a “first-chop” house. Never tries to get men in quietly, and make
them comfortable like Fung-Tching did. That's why the Gate is getting a
little bit more known than it used to be. Among the niggers of course.
The nephew daren't get a white, or, for matter of that, a mixed skin
into the place. He has to keep us three of course--me and the Memsahib
and the other Eurasian. We're fixtures. But he wouldn't give us credit
for a pipeful--not for anything.

One of these days, I hope, I shall die in the Gate. The Persian and
the Madras man are terrible shaky now. They've got a boy to light their
pipes for them. I always do that myself. Most like, I shall see them
carried out before me. I don't think I shall ever outlive the Memsahib
or Tsin-ling. Women last longer than men at the Black-Smoke, and
Tsin-ling has a deal of the old man's blood in him, though he DOES smoke
cheap stuff. The bazar-woman knew when she was going two days before her
time; and SHE died on a clean mat with a nicely wadded pillow, and the
old man hung up her pipe just above the Joss. He was always fond of her,
I fancy. But he took her bangles just the same.

I should like to die like the bazar-woman--on a clean, cool mat with a
pipe of good stuff between my lips. When I feel I'm going, I shall ask
Tsin-ling for them, and he can draw my sixty rupees a month, fresh and
fresh, as long as he pleases, and watch the black and red dragons have
their last big fight together; and then....

Well, it doesn't matter. Nothing matters much to me--only I wished
Tsin-ling wouldn't put bran into the Black Smoke.




THE STORY OF MUHAMMAD DIN.


  “Who is the happy man?  He that sees in his own house at home little
  children crowned with dust, leaping and falling and crying.”

                        Munichandra, translated by Professor Peterson.


The polo-ball was an old one, scarred, chipped, and dinted. It stood
on the mantelpiece among the pipe-stems which Imam Din, khitmatgar, was
cleaning for me.

“Does the Heaven-born want this ball?” said Imam Din, deferentially.

The Heaven-born set no particular store by it; but of what use was a
polo-ball to a khitmatgar?

“By Your Honor's favor, I have a little son. He has seen this ball, and
desires it to play with. I do not want it for myself.”

No one would for an instant accuse portly old Imam Din of wanting
to play with polo-balls. He carried out the battered thing into the
verandah; and there followed a hurricane of joyful squeaks, a patter of
small feet, and the thud-thud-thud of the ball rolling along the ground.
Evidently the little son had been waiting outside the door to secure his
treasure. But how had he managed to see that polo-ball?

Next day, coming back from office half an hour earlier than usual, I was
aware of a small figure in the dining-room--a tiny, plump figure in a
ridiculously inadequate shirt which came, perhaps, half-way down the
tubby stomach. It wandered round the room, thumb in mouth, crooning
to itself as it took stock of the pictures. Undoubtedly this was the
“little son.”

He had no business in my room, of course; but was so deeply absorbed in
his discoveries that he never noticed me in the doorway. I stepped into
the room and startled him nearly into a fit. He sat down on the ground
with a gasp. His eyes opened, and his mouth followed suit. I knew what
was coming, and fled, followed by a long, dry howl which reached the
servants' quarters far more quickly than any command of mine had ever
done. In ten seconds Imam Din was in the dining-room. Then despairing
sobs arose, and I returned to find Imam Din admonishing the small sinner
who was using most of his shirt as a handkerchief.

“This boy,” said Imam Din, judicially, “is a budmash, a big budmash.
He will, without doubt, go to the jail-khana for his behavior.” Renewed
yells from the penitent, and an elaborate apology to myself from Imam
Din.

“Tell the baby,” said I, “that the Sahib is not angry, and take him
away.” Imam Din conveyed my forgiveness to the offender, who had
now gathered all his shirt round his neck, string-wise, and the yell
subsided into a sob. The two set off for the door. “His name,” said Imam
Din, as though the name were part of the crime, “is Muhammad Din, and he
is a budmash.” Freed from present danger, Muhammad Din turned round,
in his father's arms, and said gravely:--“It is true that my name is
Muhammad Din, Tahib, but I am not a budmash. I am a MAN!”

From that day dated my acquaintance with Muhammad Din. Never again did
he come into my dining-room, but on the neutral ground of the compound,
we greeted each other with much state, though our conversation was
confined to “Talaam, Tahib” from his side and “Salaam Muhammad Din” from
mine. Daily on my return from office, the little white shirt, and the
fat little body used to rise from the shade of the creeper-covered
trellis where they had been hid; and daily I checked my horse here, that
my salutation might not be slurred over or given unseemly.

Muhammad Din never had any companions. He used to trot about the
compound, in and out of the castor-oil bushes, on mysterious errands
of his own. One day I stumbled upon some of his handiwork far down
the ground. He had half buried the polo-ball in dust, and stuck six
shrivelled old marigold flowers in a circle round it. Outside that
circle again, was a rude square, traced out in bits of red brick
alternating with fragments of broken china; the whole bounded by a
little bank of dust. The bhistie from the well-curb put in a plea for
the small architect, saying that it was only the play of a baby and did
not much disfigure my garden.

Heaven knows that I had no intention of touching the child's work then
or later; but, that evening, a stroll through the garden brought me
unawares full on it; so that I trampled, before I knew, marigold-heads,
dust-bank, and fragments of broken soap-dish into confusion past all
hope of mending. Next morning I came upon Muhammad Din crying softly to
himself over the ruin I had wrought. Some one had cruelly told him
that the Sahib was very angry with him for spoiling the garden, and had
scattered his rubbish using bad language the while. Muhammad Din
labored for an hour at effacing every trace of the dust-bank and pottery
fragments, and it was with a tearful apologetic face that he said,
“Talaam Tahib,” when I came home from the office. A hasty inquiry
resulted in Imam Din informing Muhammad Din that by my singular favor he
was permitted to disport himself as he pleased. Whereat the child took
heart and fell to tracing the ground-plan of an edifice which was to
eclipse the marigold-polo-ball creation.

For some months, the chubby little eccentricity revolved in his humble
orbit among the castor-oil bushes and in the dust; always fashioning
magnificent palaces from stale flowers thrown away by the bearer, smooth
water-worn pebbles, bits of broken glass, and feathers pulled, I fancy,
from my fowls--always alone and always crooning to himself.

A gayly-spotted sea-shell was dropped one day close to the last of his
little buildings; and I looked that Muhammad Din should build something
more than ordinarily splendid on the strength of it. Nor was I
disappointed. He meditated for the better part of an hour, and his
crooning rose to a jubilant song. Then he began tracing in dust. It
would certainly be a wondrous palace, this one, for it was two
yards long and a yard broad in ground-plan. But the palace was never
completed.

Next day there was no Muhammad Din at the head of the carriage-drive,
and no “Talaam Tahib” to welcome my return. I had grown accustomed to
the greeting, and its omission troubled me. Next day, Imam Din told me
that the child was suffering slightly from fever and needed quinine. He
got the medicine, and an English Doctor.

“They have no stamina, these brats,” said the Doctor, as he left Imam
Din's quarters.

A week later, though I would have given much to have avoided it, I met
on the road to the Mussulman burying-ground Imam Din, accompanied by one
other friend, carrying in his arms, wrapped in a white cloth, all that
was left of little Muhammad Din.




ON THE STRENGTH OF A LIKENESS.


   If your mirror be broken, look into still water; but have a care
   that you do not fall in.

                                                  Hindu Proverb.


Next to a requited attachment, one of the most convenient things that a
young man can carry about with him at the beginning of his career, is
an unrequited attachment. It makes him feel important and business-like,
and blase, and cynical; and whenever he has a touch of liver, or suffers
from want of exercise, he can mourn over his lost love, and be very
happy in a tender, twilight fashion.

Hannasyde's affair of the heart had been a Godsend to him. It was four
years old, and the girl had long since given up thinking of it. She had
married and had many cares of her own. In the beginning, she had told
Hannasyde that, “while she could never be anything more than a sister
to him, she would always take the deepest interest in his welfare.” This
startlingly new and original remark gave Hannasyde something to think
over for two years; and his own vanity filled in the other twenty-four
months. Hannasyde was quite different from Phil Garron, but, none the
less, had several points in common with that far too lucky man.

He kept his unrequited attachment by him as men keep a well-smoked
pipe--for comfort's sake, and because it had grown dear in the using. It
brought him happily through the Simla season. Hannasyde was not lovely.
There was a crudity in his manners, and a roughness in the way in which
he helped a lady on to her horse, that did not attract the other sex
to him. Even if he had cast about for their favor, which he did not. He
kept his wounded heart all to himself for a while.

Then trouble came to him. All who go to Simla, know the slope from the
Telegraph to the Public Works Office. Hannasyde was loafing up the hill,
one September morning between calling hours, when a 'rickshaw came down
in a hurry, and in the 'rickshaw sat the living, breathing image of the
girl who had made him so happily unhappy. Hannasyde leaned against the
railing and gasped. He wanted to run downhill after the 'rickshaw, but
that was impossible; so he went forward with most of his blood in his
temples. It was impossible, for many reasons, that the woman in the
'rickshaw could be the girl he had known. She was, he discovered later,
the wife of a man from Dindigul, or Coimbatore, or some out-of-the-way
place, and she had come up to Simla early in the season for the good of
her health. She was going back to Dindigul, or wherever it was, at the
end of the season; and in all likelihood would never return to Simla
again, her proper Hill-station being Ootacamund. That night, Hannasyde,
raw and savage from the raking up of all old feelings, took counsel with
himself for one measured hour. What he decided upon was this; and you
must decide for yourself how much genuine affection for the old love,
and how much a very natural inclination to go abroad and enjoy himself,
affected the decision. Mrs. Landys-Haggert would never in all human
likelihood cross his path again. So whatever he did didn't much matter.
She was marvellously like the girl who “took a deep interest” and the
rest of the formula. All things considered, it would be pleasant to make
the acquaintance of Mrs. Landys-Haggert, and for a little time--only a
very little time--to make believe that he was with Alice Chisane again.
Every one is more or less mad on one point. Hannasyde's particular
monomania was his old love, Alice Chisane.

He made it his business to get introduced to Mrs. Haggert, and the
introduction prospered. He also made it his business to see as much as
he could of that lady. When a man is in earnest as to interviews, the
facilities which Simla offers are startling. There are garden-parties,
and tennis-parties, and picnics, and luncheons at Annandale, and
rifle-matches, and dinners and balls; besides rides and walks, which are
matters of private arrangement. Hannasyde had started with the intention
of seeing a likeness, and he ended by doing much more. He wanted to
be deceived, he meant to be deceived, and he deceived himself very
thoroughly. Not only were the face and figure, the face and figure of
Alice Chisane, but the voice and lower tones were exactly the same, and
so were the turns of speech; and the little mannerisms, that every woman
has, of gait and gesticulation, were absolutely and identically the
same. The turn of the head was the same; the tired look in the eyes
at the end of a long walk was the same; the sloop and wrench over
the saddle to hold in a pulling horse was the same; and once, most
marvellous of all, Mrs. Landys-Haggert singing to herself in the next
room, while Hannasyde was waiting to take her for a ride, hummed, note
for note, with a throaty quiver of the voice in the second line:--“Poor
Wandering One!” exactly as Alice Chisane had hummed it for Hannasyde in
the dusk of an English drawing-room. In the actual woman herself--in
the soul of her--there was not the least likeness; she and Alice Chisane
being cast in different moulds. But all that Hannasyde wanted to know
and see and think about, was this maddening and perplexing likeness of
face and voice and manner. He was bent on making a fool of himself that
way; and he was in no sort disappointed.

Open and obvious devotion from any sort of man is always pleasant to
any sort of woman; but Mrs. Landys-Haggert, being a woman of the world,
could make nothing of Hannasyde's admiration.

He would take any amount of trouble--he was a selfish man habitually--to
meet and forestall, if possible, her wishes. Anything she told him to do
was law; and he was, there could be no doubting it, fond of her company
so long as she talked to him, and kept on talking about trivialities.
But when she launched into expression of her personal views and her
wrongs, those small social differences that make the spice of Simla
life, Hannasyde was neither pleased nor interested. He didn't want
to know anything about Mrs. Landys-Haggert, or her experiences in
the past--she had travelled nearly all over the world, and could talk
cleverly--he wanted the likeness of Alice Chisane before his eyes and
her voice in his ears. Anything outside that, reminding him of another
personality jarred, and he showed that it did.

Under the new Post Office, one evening, Mrs. Landys-Haggert turned on
him, and spoke her mind shortly and without warning. “Mr. Hannasyde,”
 said she, “will you be good enough to explain why you have appointed
yourself my special cavalier servente? I don't understand it. But I
am perfectly certain, somehow or other, that you don't care the least
little bit in the world for ME.” This seems to support, by the way, the
theory that no man can act or tell lies to a woman without being found
out. Hannasyde was taken off his guard. His defence never was a strong
one, because he was always thinking of himself, and he blurted out,
before he knew what he was saying, this inexpedient answer:--“No more I
do.”

The queerness of the situation and the reply, made Mrs. Landys-Haggert
laugh. Then it all came out; and at the end of Hannasyde's lucid
explanation, Mrs. Haggert said, with the least little touch of scorn in
her voice:--“So I'm to act as the lay-figure for you to hang the rags of
your tattered affections on, am I?”

Hannasyde didn't see what answer was required, and he devoted himself
generally and vaguely to the praise of Alice Chisane, which was
unsatisfactory. Now it is to be thoroughly made clear that Mrs. Haggert
had not the shadow of a ghost of an interest in Hannasyde. Only....
only no woman likes being made love through instead of to--specially on
behalf of a musty divinity of four years' standing.

Hannasyde did not see that he had made any very particular exhibition
of himself. He was glad to find a sympathetic soul in the arid wastes of
Simla.

When the season ended, Hannasyde went down to his own place and Mrs.
Haggert to hers. “It was like making love to a ghost,” said Hannasyde
to himself, “and it doesn't matter; and now I'll get to my work.” But
he found himself thinking steadily of the Haggert-Chisane ghost; and he
could not be certain whether it was Haggert or Chisane that made up the
greater part of the pretty phantom.

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

He got understanding a month later.

A peculiar point of this peculiar country is the way in which a
heartless Government transfers men from one end of the Empire to the
other. You can never be sure of getting rid of a friend or an enemy till
he or she dies. There was a case once--but that's another story.

Haggert's Department ordered him up from Dindigul to the Frontier at
two days' notice, and he went through, losing money at every step, from
Dindigul to his station. He dropped Mrs. Haggert at Lucknow, to stay
with some friends there, to take part in a big ball at the Chutter
Munzil, and to come on when he had made the new home a little
comfortable. Lucknow was Hannasyde's station, and Mrs. Haggert stayed
a week there. Hannasyde went to meet her. And the train came in,
he discovered which he had been thinking of for the past month. The
unwisdom of his conduct also struck him. The Lucknow week, with two
dances, and an unlimited quantity of rides together, clinched matters;
and Hannasyde found himself pacing this circle of thought:--He
adored Alice Chisane--at least he HAD adored her. AND he admired
Mrs. Landys-Haggert because she was like Alice Chisane. BUT Mrs.
Landys-Haggert was not in the least like Alice Chisane, being a thousand
times more adorable. NOW Alice Chisane was “the bride of another,” and
so was Mrs. Landys-Haggert, and a good and honest wife too. THEREFORE,
he, Hannasyde, was.... here he called himself several hard names, and
wished that he had been wise in the beginning.

Whether Mrs. Landys-Haggert saw what was going on in his mind, she alone
knows. He seemed to take an unqualified interest in everything connected
with herself, as distinguished from the Alice-Chisane likeness, and he
said one or two things which, if Alice Chisane had been still betrothed
to him, could scarcely have been excused, even on the grounds of the
likeness. But Mrs. Haggert turned the remarks aside, and spent a long
time in making Hannasyde see what a comfort and a pleasure she had been
to him because of her strange resemblance to his old love. Hannasyde
groaned in his saddle and said, “Yes, indeed,” and busied himself with
preparations for her departure to the Frontier, feeling very small and
miserable.

The last day of her stay at Lucknow came, and Hannasyde saw her off
at the Railway Station. She was very grateful for his kindness and the
trouble he had taken, and smiled pleasantly and sympathetically as one
who knew the Alice-Chisane reason of that kindness. And Hannasyde abused
the coolies with the luggage, and hustled the people on the platform,
and prayed that the roof might fall in and slay him.

As the train went out slowly, Mrs. Landys-Haggert leaned out of the
window to say goodbye:--“On second thoughts au revoir, Mr. Hannasyde. I
go Home in the Spring, and perhaps I may meet you in Town.”

Hannasyde shook hands, and said very earnestly and adoringly:--“I hope
to Heaven I shall never see your face again!”

And Mrs. Haggert understood.




WRESSLEY OF THE FOREIGN OFFICE.


     I closed and drew for my love's sake,
       That now is false to me,
     And I slew the Riever of Tarrant Moss,
       And set Dumeny free.

     And ever they give me praise and gold,
       And ever I moan my loss,
     For I struck the blow for my false love's sake,
       And not for the men at the Moss.

                                   Tarrant Moss.


One of the many curses of our life out here is the want of atmosphere in
the painter's sense. There are no half-tints worth noticing. Men stand
out all crude and raw, with nothing to tone them down, and nothing to
scale them against. They do their work, and grow to think that there is
nothing but their work, and nothing like their work, and that they are
the real pivots on which the administration turns. Here is an instance
of this feeling. A half-caste clerk was ruling forms in a Pay Office. He
said to me:--“Do you know what would happen if I added or took away one
single line on this sheet?” Then, with the air of a conspirator:--“It
would disorganize the whole of the Treasury payments throughout the
whole of the Presidency Circle! Think of that?”

If men had not this delusion as to the ultra-importance of their own
particular employments, I suppose that they would sit down and kill
themselves. But their weakness is wearisome, particularly when the
listener knows that he himself commits exactly the same sin.

Even the Secretariat believes that it does good when it asks an
over-driven Executive Officer to take census of wheat-weevils through a
district of five thousand square miles.

There was a man once in the Foreign Office--a man who had grown
middle-aged in the department, and was commonly said, by irreverent
juniors, to be able to repeat Aitchison's “Treaties and Sunnuds”
 backwards, in his sleep. What he did with his stored knowledge only the
Secretary knew; and he, naturally, would not publish the news abroad.
This man's name was Wressley, and it was the Shibboleth, in those days,
to say:--“Wressley knows more about the Central Indian States than any
living man.” If you did not say this, you were considered one of mean
understanding.

Now-a-days, the man who says that he knows the ravel of the inter-tribal
complications across the Border is of more use; but in Wressley's time,
much attention was paid to the Central Indian States. They were called
“foci” and “factors,” and all manner of imposing names.

And here the curse of Anglo-Indian life fell heavily. When Wressley
lifted up his voice, and spoke about such-and-such a succession to
such-and-such a throne, the Foreign Office were silent, and Heads
of Departments repeated the last two or three words of Wressley's
sentences, and tacked “yes, yes,” on them, and knew that they were
“assisting the Empire to grapple with serious political contingencies.”
 In most big undertakings, one or two men do the work while the rest sit
near and talk till the ripe decorations begin to fall.

Wressley was the working-member of the Foreign Office firm, and, to keep
him up to his duties when he showed signs of flagging, he was made
much of by his superiors and told what a fine fellow he was. He did not
require coaxing, because he was of tough build, but what he received
confirmed him in the belief that there was no one quite so absolutely
and imperatively necessary to the stability of India as Wressley of the
Foreign Office. There might be other good men, but the known, honored
and trusted man among men was Wressley of the Foreign Office. We had a
Viceroy in those days who knew exactly when to “gentle” a fractious big
man and to hearten up a collar-galled little one, and so keep all his
team level. He conveyed to Wressley the impression which I have just
set down; and even tough men are apt to be disorganized by a Viceroy's
praise. There was a case once--but that is another story.

All India knew Wressley's name and office--it was in Thacker and Spink's
Directory--but who he was personally, or what he did, or what his
special merits were, not fifty men knew or cared. His work filled all
his time, and he found no leisure to cultivate acquaintances beyond
those of dead Rajput chiefs with Ahir blots in their 'scutcheons.
Wressley would have made a very good Clerk in the Herald's College had
he not been a Bengal Civilian.

Upon a day, between office and office, great trouble came to
Wressley--overwhelmed him, knocked him down, and left him gasping
as though he had been a little school-boy. Without reason, against
prudence, and at a moment's notice, he fell in love with a frivolous,
golden-haired girl who used to tear about Simla Mall on a high, rough
waler, with a blue velvet jockey-cap crammed over her eyes. Her name was
Venner--Tillie Venner--and she was delightful. She took Wressley's heart
at a hand-gallop, and Wressley found that it was not good for man to
live alone; even with half the Foreign Office Records in his presses.

Then Simla laughed, for Wressley in love was slightly ridiculous. He did
his best to interest the girl in himself--that is to say, his work--and
she, after the manner of women, did her best to appear interested in
what, behind his back, she called “Mr. Wressley's Wajahs”; for she
lisped very prettily. She did not understand one little thing about
them, but she acted as if she did. Men have married on that sort of
error before now.

Providence, however, had care of Wressley. He was immensely struck with
Miss Venner's intelligence. He would have been more impressed had
he heard her private and confidential accounts of his calls. He held
peculiar notions as to the wooing of girls. He said that the best work
of a man's career should be laid reverently at their feet. Ruskin writes
something like this somewhere, I think; but in ordinary life a few
kisses are better and save time.

About a month after he had lost his heart to Miss Venner, and had been
doing his work vilely in consequence, the first idea of his “Native Rule
in Central India” struck Wressley and filled him with joy. It was, as he
sketched it, a great thing--the work of his life--a really comprehensive
survey of a most fascinating subject--to be written with all the special
and laboriously acquired knowledge of Wressley of the Foreign Office--a
gift fit for an Empress.

He told Miss Venner that he was going to take leave, and hoped, on his
return, to bring her a present worthy of her acceptance. Would she wait?
Certainly she would. Wressley drew seventeen hundred rupees a month. She
would wait a year for that. Her mamma would help her to wait.

So Wressley took one year's leave and all the available documents, about
a truck-load, that he could lay hands on, and went down to Central India
with his notion hot in his head. He began his book in the land he was
writing of. Too much official correspondence had made him a frigid
workman, and he must have guessed that he needed the white light of
local color on his palette. This is a dangerous paint for amateurs to
play with.

Heavens, how that man worked! He caught his Rajahs, analyzed his Rajahs,
and traced them up into the mists of Time and beyond, with their
queens and their concubines. He dated and cross-dated, pedigreed and
triple-pedigreed, compared, noted, connoted, wove, strung, sorted,
selected, inferred, calendared and counter-calendared for ten hours a
day. And, because this sudden and new light of Love was upon him, he
turned those dry bones of history and dirty records of misdeeds into
things to weep or to laugh over as he pleased. His heart and soul were
at the end of his pen, and they got into the link. He was dowered with
sympathy, insight, humor and style for two hundred and thirty days and
nights; and his book was a Book. He had his vast special knowledge with
him, so to speak; but the spirit, the woven-in human Touch, the poetry
and the power of the output, were beyond all special knowledge. But I
doubt whether he knew the gift that was in him then, and thus he may
have lost some happiness. He was toiling for Tillie Venner, not for
himself. Men often do their best work blind, for some one else's sake.

Also, though this has nothing to do with the story, in India where every
one knows every one else, you can watch men being driven, by the women
who govern them, out of the rank-and-file and sent to take up points
alone. A good man once started, goes forward; but an average man, so
soon as the woman loses interest in his success as a tribute to her
power, comes back to the battalion and is no more heard of.

Wressley bore the first copy of his book to Simla and, blushing and
stammering, presented it to Miss Venner. She read a little of it. I
give her review verbatim:--“Oh, your book? It's all about those how-wid
Wajahs. I didn't understand it.”

    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

Wressley of the Foreign Office was broken, smashed,--I am not
exaggerating--by this one frivolous little girl. All that he could say
feebly was:--“But, but it's my magnum opus! The work of my life.” Miss
Venner did not know what magnum opus meant; but she knew that Captain
Kerrington had won three races at the last Gymkhana. Wressley didn't
press her to wait for him any longer. He had sense enough for that.

Then came the reaction after the year's strain, and Wressley went back
to the Foreign Office and his “Wajahs,” a compiling, gazetteering,
report-writing hack, who would have been dear at three hundred rupees
a month. He abided by Miss Venner's review. Which proves that the
inspiration in the book was purely temporary and unconnected with
himself. Nevertheless, he had no right to sink, in a hill-tarn, five
packing-cases, brought up at enormous expense from Bombay, of the best
book of Indian history ever written.

When he sold off before retiring, some years later, I was turning over
his shelves, and came across the only existing copy of “Native Rule in
Central India”--the copy that Miss Venner could not understand. I read
it, sitting on his mule-trucks, as long as the light lasted, and offered
him his own price for it. He looked over my shoulder for a few pages and
said to himself drearily:--“Now, how in the world did I come to write
such damned good stuff as that?” Then to me:--“Take it and keep
it. Write one of your penny-farthing yarns about its birth.
Perhaps--perhaps--the whole business may have been ordained to that
end.”

Which, knowing what Wressley of the Foreign Office was once, struck me
as about the bitterest thing that I had ever heard a man say of his own
work.




BY WORD OF MOUTH.


     Not though you die to-night, O Sweet, and wail,
       A spectre at my door,
     Shall mortal Fear make Love immortal fail--
       I shall but love you more,
     Who from Death's house returning, give me still
       One moment's comfort in my matchless ill.

                                     Shadow Houses.


This tale may be explained by those who know how souls are made, and
where the bounds of the Possible are put down. I have lived long enough
in this country to know that it is best to know nothing, and can only
write the story as it happened.

Dumoise was our Civil Surgeon at Meridki, and we called him “Dormouse,”
 because he was a round little, sleepy little man. He was a good
Doctor and never quarrelled with any one, not even with our Deputy
Commissioner, who had the manners of a bargee and the tact of a horse.
He married a girl as round and as sleepy-looking as himself. She was
a Miss Hillardyce, daughter of “Squash” Hillardyce of the Berars, who
married his Chief's daughter by mistake. But that is another story.

A honeymoon in India is seldom more than a week long; but there is
nothing to hinder a couple from extending it over two or three years.
This is a delightful country for married folk who are wrapped up in one
another. They can live absolutely alone and without interruption--just
as the Dormice did. These two little people retired from the world after
their marriage, and were very happy. They were forced, of course,
to give occasional dinners, but they made no friends hereby, and the
Station went its own way and forgot them; only saying, occasionally,
that Dormouse was the best of good fellows, though dull. A Civil Surgeon
who never quarrels is a rarity, appreciated as such.

Few people can afford to play Robinson Crusoe anywhere--least of all
in India, where we are few in the land, and very much dependent on each
other's kind offices. Dumoise was wrong in shutting himself from the
world for a year, and he discovered his mistake when an epidemic of
typhoid broke out in the Station in the heart of the cold weather, and
his wife went down. He was a shy little man, and five days were wasted
before he realized that Mrs. Dumoise was burning with something worse
than simple fever, and three days more passed before he ventured to call
on Mrs. Shute, the Engineer's wife, and timidly speak about his trouble.
Nearly every household in India knows that Doctors are very helpless
in typhoid. The battle must be fought out between Death and the Nurses,
minute by minute and degree by degree. Mrs. Shute almost boxed Dumoise's
ears for what she called his “criminal delay,” and went off at once to
look after the poor girl. We had seven cases of typhoid in the Station
that winter and, as the average of death is about one in every five
cases, we felt certain that we should have to lose somebody. But all did
their best. The women sat up nursing the women, and the men turned
to and tended the bachelors who were down, and we wrestled with those
typhoid cases for fifty-six days, and brought them through the Valley of
the Shadow in triumph. But, just when we thought all was over, and were
going to give a dance to celebrate the victory, little Mrs. Dumoise
got a relapse and died in a week and the Station went to the funeral.
Dumoise broke down utterly at the brink of the grave, and had to be
taken away.

After the death, Dumoise crept into his own house and refused to be
comforted. He did his duties perfectly, but we all felt that he should
go on leave, and the other men of his own Service told him so. Dumoise
was very thankful for the suggestion--he was thankful for anything in
those days--and went to Chini on a walking-tour. Chini is some twenty
marches from Simla, in the heart of the Hills, and the scenery is good
if you are in trouble. You pass through big, still deodar-forests, and
under big, still cliffs, and over big, still grass-downs swelling like
a woman's breasts; and the wind across the grass, and the rain among the
deodars says:--“Hush--hush--hush.” So little Dumoise was packed off to
Chini, to wear down his grief with a full-plate camera, and a rifle. He
took also a useless bearer, because the man had been his wife's favorite
servant. He was idle and a thief, but Dumoise trusted everything to him.

On his way back from Chini, Dumoise turned aside to Bagi, through the
Forest Reserve which is on the spur of Mount Huttoo. Some men who have
travelled more than a little say that the march from Kotegarh to Bagi is
one of the finest in creation. It runs through dark wet forest, and ends
suddenly in bleak, nipped hill-side and black rocks. Bagi dak-bungalow
is open to all the winds and is bitterly cold. Few people go to Bagi.
Perhaps that was the reason why Dumoise went there. He halted at seven
in the evening, and his bearer went down the hill-side to the village
to engage coolies for the next day's march. The sun had set, and the
night-winds were beginning to croon among the rocks. Dumoise leaned on
the railing of the verandah, waiting for his bearer to return. The man
came back almost immediately after he had disappeared, and at such a
rate that Dumoise fancied he must have crossed a bear. He was running as
hard as he could up the face of the hill.

But there was no bear to account for his terror. He raced to the
verandah and fell down, the blood spurting from his nose and his face
iron-gray. Then he gurgled:--“I have seen the Memsahib! I have seen the
Memsahib!”

“Where?” said Dumoise.

“Down there, walking on the road to the village. She was in a blue
dress, and she lifted the veil of her bonnet and said:--'Ram Dass, give
my salaams to the Sahib, and tell him that I shall meet him next month
at Nuddea.' Then I ran away, because I was afraid.”

What Dumoise said or did I do not know. Ram Dass declares that he said
nothing, but walked up and down the verandah all the cold night, waiting
for the Memsahib to come up the hill and stretching out his arms into
the dark like a madman. But no Memsahib came, and, next day, he went on
to Simla cross-questioning the bearer every hour.

Ram Dass could only say that he had met Mrs. Dumoise and that she had
lifted up her veil and given him the message which he had faithfully
repeated to Dumoise. To this statement Ram Dass adhered. He did not know
where Nuddea was, had no friends at Nuddea, and would most certainly
never go to Nuddea; even though his pay were doubled.

Nuddea is in Bengal, and has nothing whatever to do with a doctor
serving in the Punjab. It must be more than twelve hundred miles from
Meridki.

Dumoise went through Simla without halting, and returned to Meridki
there to take over charge from the man who had been officiating for him
during his tour. There were some Dispensary accounts to be explained,
and some recent orders of the Surgeon-General to be noted, and,
altogether, the taking-over was a full day's work. In the evening,
Dumoise told his locum tenens, who was an old friend of his bachelor
days, what had happened at Bagi; and the man said that Ram Dass might as
well have chosen Tuticorin while he was about it.

At that moment a telegraph-peon came in with a telegram from Simla,
ordering Dumoise not to take over charge at Meridki, but to go at once
to Nuddea on special duty. There was a nasty outbreak of cholera at
Nuddea, and the Bengal Government, being shorthanded, as usual, had
borrowed a Surgeon from the Punjab.

Dumoise threw the telegram across the table and said:--“Well?”

The other Doctor said nothing. It was all that he could say.

Then he remembered that Dumoise had passed through Simla on his way
from Bagi; and thus might, possibly, have heard the first news of the
impending transfer.

He tried to put the question, and the implied suspicion into words, but
Dumoise stopped him with:--“If I had desired THAT, I should never have
come back from Chini. I was shooting there. I wish to live, for I have
things to do.... but I shall not be sorry.”

The other man bowed his head, and helped, in the twilight, to pack up
Dumoise's just opened trunks. Ram Dass entered with the lamps.

“Where is the Sahib going?” he asked.

“To Nuddea,” said Dumoise, softly.

Ram Dass clawed Dumoise's knees and boots and begged him not to go. Ram
Dass wept and howled till he was turned out of the room. Then he wrapped
up all his belongings and came back to ask for a character. He was not
going to Nuddea to see his Sahib die, and, perhaps to die himself.

So Dumoise gave the man his wages and went down to Nuddea alone; the
other Doctor bidding him good-bye as one under sentence of death.

Eleven days later, he had joined his Memsahib; and the Bengal Government
had to borrow a fresh Doctor to cope with that epidemic at Nuddea. The
first importation lay dead in Chooadanga Dak-Bungalow.




TO BE HELD FOR REFERENCE.


     By the hoof of the Wild Goat up-tossed
     From the Cliff where She lay in the Sun,
            Fell the Stone
     To the Tarn where the daylight is lost;
     So She fell from the light of the Sun,
            And alone.

     Now the fall was ordained from the first,
     With the Goat and the Cliff and the Tarn,
            But the Stone
     Knows only Her life is accursed,
     As She sinks in the depths of the Tarn,
            And alone.

     Oh, Thou who has builded the world
     Oh, Thou who hast lighted the Sun!
     Oh, Thou who hast darkened the Tarn!
           Judge Thou
     The Sin of the Stone that was hurled
     By the Goat from the light of the Sun,
     As She sinks in the mire of the Tarn,
           Even now--even now--even now!

     From the Unpublished Papers of McIntosh Jellaludin.


          “Say, is it dawn, is it dusk in thy Bower,
           Thou whom I long for, who longest for me?
           Oh be it night--be it--”


Here he fell over a little camel-colt that was sleeping in the Serai
where the horse-traders and the best of the blackguards from Central
Asia live; and, because he was very drunk indeed and the night was dark,
he could not rise again till I helped him. That was the beginning of my
acquaintance with McIntosh Jellaludin. When a loafer, and drunk, sings
The Song of the Bower, he must be worth cultivating. He got off the
camel's back and said, rather thickly:--“I--I--I'm a bit screwed, but a
dip in Loggerhead will put me right again; and I say, have you spoken to
Symonds about the mare's knees?”

Now Loggerhead was six thousand weary miles away from us, close to
Mesopotamia, where you mustn't fish and poaching is impossible, and
Charley Symonds' stable a half mile further across the paddocks. It was
strange to hear all the old names, on a May night, among the horses
and camels of the Sultan Caravanserai. Then the man seemed to remember
himself and sober down at the same time. He leaned against the camel and
pointed to a corner of the Serai where a lamp was burning:--

“I live there,” said he, “and I should be extremely obliged if you would
be good enough to help my mutinous feet thither; for I am more than
usually drunk--most--most phenomenally tight. But not in respect to my
head. 'My brain cries out against'--how does it go? But my head rides on
the--rolls on the dung-hill I should have said, and controls the qualm.”

I helped him through the gangs of tethered horses and he collapsed on
the edge of the verandah in front of the line of native quarters.

“Thanks--a thousand thanks! O Moon and little, little Stars! To think
that a man should so shamelessly.... Infamous liquor, too. Ovid in exile
drank no worse. Better. It was frozen. Alas! I had no ice. Good-night. I
would introduce you to my wife were I sober--or she civilized.”

A native woman came out of the darkness of the room, and began calling
the man names; so I went away. He was the most interesting loafer that
I had the pleasure of knowing for a long time; and later on, he became
a friend of mine. He was a tall, well-built, fair man fearfully shaken
with drink, and he looked nearer fifty than the thirty-five which, he
said, was his real age. When a man begins to sink in India, and is not
sent Home by his friends as soon as may be, he falls very low from a
respectable point of view. By the time that he changes his creed, as did
McIntosh, he is past redemption.

In most big cities, natives will tell you of two or three Sahibs,
generally low-caste, who have turned Hindu or Mussulman, and who live
more or less as such. But it is not often that you can get to know
them. As McIntosh himself used to say:--“If I change my religion for my
stomach's sake, I do not seek to become a martyr to missionaries, nor am
I anxious for notoriety.”

At the outset of acquaintance McIntosh warned me. “Remember this. I am
not an object for charity. I require neither your money, your food,
nor your cast-off raiment. I am that rare animal, a self-supporting
drunkard. If you choose, I will smoke with you, for the tobacco of the
bazars does not, I admit, suit my palate; and I will borrow any books
which you may not specially value. It is more than likely that I shall
sell them for bottles of excessively filthy country-liquors. In return,
you shall share such hospitality as my house affords. Here is a charpoy
on which two can sit, and it is possible that there may, from time to
time, be food in that platter. Drink, unfortunately, you will find on
the premises at any hour: and thus I make you welcome to all my poor
establishments.”

I was admitted to the McIntosh household--I and my good tobacco. But
nothing else. Unluckily, one cannot visit a loafer in the Serai by
day. Friends buying horses would not understand it. Consequently, I
was obliged to see McIntosh after dark. He laughed at this, and said
simply:--“You are perfectly right. When I enjoyed a position in society,
rather higher than yours, I should have done exactly the same thing,
Good Heavens! I was once”--he spoke as though he had fallen from the
Command of a Regiment--“an Oxford Man!” This accounted for the reference
to Charley Symonds' stable.

“You,” said McIntosh, slowly, “have not had that advantage; but, to
outward appearance, you do not seem possessed of a craving for strong
drinks. On the whole, I fancy that you are the luckier of the two. Yet
I am not certain. You are--forgive my saying so even while I am smoking
your excellent tobacco--painfully ignorant of many things.”

We were sitting together on the edge of his bedstead, for he owned
no chairs, watching the horses being watered for the night, while the
native woman was preparing dinner. I did not like being patronized by a
loafer, but I was his guest for the time being, though he owned only one
very torn alpaca-coat and a pair of trousers made out of gunny-bags.
He took the pipe out of his mouth, and went on judicially:--“All things
considered, I doubt whether you are the luckier. I do not refer to
your extremely limited classical attainments, or your excruciating
quantities, but to your gross ignorance of matters more immediately
under your notice. That for instance.”--He pointed to a woman cleaning
a samovar near the well in the centre of the Serai. She was flicking the
water out of the spout in regular cadenced jerks.

“There are ways and ways of cleaning samovars. If you knew why she
was doing her work in that particular fashion, you would know what the
Spanish Monk meant when he said--

     'I the Trinity illustrate,
        Drinking watered orange-pulp--
      In three sips the Aryan frustrate,
        While he drains his at one gulp.--'


and many other things which now are hidden from your eyes. However, Mrs.
McIntosh has prepared dinner. Let us come and eat after the fashion of
the people of the country--of whom, by the way, you know nothing.”

The native woman dipped her hand in the dish with us. This was wrong.
The wife should always wait until the husband has eaten. McIntosh
Jellaludin apologized, saying:--

“It is an English prejudice which I have not been able to overcome; and
she loves me. Why, I have never been able to understand. I fore-gathered
with her at Jullundur, three years ago, and she has remained with me
ever since. I believe her to be moral, and know her to be skilled in
cookery.”

He patted the woman's head as he spoke, and she cooed softly. She was
not pretty to look at.

McIntosh never told me what position he had held before his fall. He
was, when sober, a scholar and a gentleman. When drunk, he was rather
more of the first than the second. He used to get drunk about once a
week for two days. On those occasions the native woman tended him
while he raved in all tongues except his own. One day, indeed, he began
reciting Atalanta in Calydon, and went through it to the end, beating
time to the swing of the verse with a bedstead-leg. But he did most of
his ravings in Greek or German. The man's mind was a perfect rag-bag
of useless things. Once, when he was beginning to get sober, he told
me that I was the only rational being in the Inferno into which he had
descended--a Virgil in the Shades, he said--and that, in return for
my tobacco, he would, before he died, give me the materials of a new
Inferno that should make me greater than Dante. Then he fell asleep on a
horse-blanket and woke up quite calm.

“Man,” said he, “when you have reached the uttermost depths of
degradation, little incidents which would vex a higher life, are to you
of no consequence. Last night, my soul was among the gods; but I make no
doubt that my bestial body was writhing down here in the garbage.”

“You were abominably drunk if that's what you mean,” I said.

“I WAS drunk--filthy drunk. I who am the son of a man with whom you have
no concern--I who was once Fellow of a College whose buttery-hatch you
have not seen. I was loathsomely drunk. But consider how lightly I am
touched. It is nothing to me. Less than nothing; for I do not even feel
the headache which should be my portion. Now, in a higher life, how
ghastly would have been my punishment, how bitter my repentance! Believe
me, my friend with the neglected education, the highest is as the
lowest--always supposing each degree extreme.”

He turned round on the blanket, put his head between his fists and
continued:--

“On the Soul which I have lost and on the Conscience which I have
killed, I tell you that I CANNOT feel! I am as the gods, knowing good
and evil, but untouched by either. Is this enviable or is it not?”

When a man has lost the warning of “next morning's head,” he must be in
a bad state, I answered, looking at McIntosh on the blanket, with his
hair over his eyes and his lips blue-white, that I did not think the
insensibility good enough.

“For pity's sake, don't say that! I tell you, it IS good and most
enviable. Think of my consolations!”

“Have you so many, then, McIntosh?”

“Certainly; your attempts at sarcasm which is essentially the weapon
of a cultured man, are crude. First, my attainments, my classical and
literary knowledge, blurred, perhaps, by immoderate drinking--which
reminds me that before my soul went to the Gods last night, I sold the
Pickering Horace you so kindly lent me. Ditta Mull the Clothesman has
it. It fetched ten annas, and may be redeemed for a rupee--but still
infinitely superior to yours. Secondly, the abiding affection of Mrs.
McIntosh, best of wives. Thirdly, a monument, more enduring than brass,
which I have built up in the seven years of my degradation.”

He stopped here, and crawled across the room for a drink of water. He
was very shaky and sick.

He referred several times to his “treasure”--some great possession that
he owned--but I held this to be the raving of drink. He was as poor and
as proud as he could be. His manner was not pleasant, but he knew enough
about the natives, among whom seven years of his life had been spent,
to make his acquaintance worth having. He used actually to laugh at
Strickland as an ignorant man--“ignorant West and East”--he said. His
boast was, first, that he was an Oxford Man of rare and shining parts,
which may or may not have been true--I did not know enough to check his
statements--and, secondly, that he “had his hand on the pulse of native
life”--which was a fact. As an Oxford man, he struck me as a prig: he
was always throwing his education about. As a Mahommedan faquir--as
McIntosh Jellaludin--he was all that I wanted for my own ends. He smoked
several pounds of my tobacco, and taught me several ounces of things
worth knowing; but he would never accept any gifts, not even when the
cold weather came, and gripped the poor thin chest under the poor thin
alpaca-coat. He grew very angry, and said that I had insulted him, and
that he was not going into hospital. He had lived like a beast and he
would die rationally, like a man.

As a matter of fact, he died of pneumonia; and on the night of his death
sent over a grubby note asking me to come and help him to die.

The native woman was weeping by the side of the bed. McIntosh, wrapped
in a cotton cloth, was too weak to resent a fur coat being thrown over
him. He was very active as far as his mind was concerned, and his eyes
were blazing. When he had abused the Doctor who came with me so foully
that the indignant old fellow left, he cursed me for a few minutes and
calmed down.

Then he told his wife to fetch out “The Book” from a hole in the wall.
She brought out a big bundle, wrapped in the tail of a petticoat, of old
sheets of miscellaneous note-paper, all numbered and covered with fine
cramped writing. McIntosh ploughed his hand through the rubbish and
stirred it up lovingly.

“This,” he said, “is my work--the Book of McIntosh Jellaludin, showing
what he saw and how he lived, and what befell him and others; being also
an account of the life and sins and death of Mother Maturin. What Mirza
Murad Ali Beg's book is to all other books on native life, will my work
be to Mirza Murad Ali Beg's!”

This, as will be conceded by any one who knows Mirza Ali Beg's book, was
a sweeping statement. The papers did not look specially valuable; but
McIntosh handled them as if they were currency-notes. Then he said
slowly:--“In despite the many weaknesses of your education, you have
been good to me. I will speak of your tobacco when I reach the Gods. I
owe you much thanks for many kindnesses. But I abominate indebtedness.
For this reason I bequeath to you now the monument more enduring than
brass--my one book--rude and imperfect in parts, but oh, how rare in
others! I wonder if you will understand it. It is a gift more honorable
than... Bah! where is my brain rambling to? You will mutilate it
horribly. You will knock out the gems you call 'Latin quotations,' you
Philistine, and you will butcher the style to carve into your own jerky
jargon; but you cannot destroy the whole of it. I bequeath it to you.
Ethel... My brain again!... Mrs. McIntosh, bear witness that I give the
sahib all these papers. They would be of no use to you, Heart of my
heart; and I lay it upon you,” he turned to me here, “that you do not
let my book die in its present form. It is yours unconditionally--the
story of McIntosh Jellaludin, which is NOT the story of McIntosh
Jellaludin, but of a greater man than he, and of a far greater woman.
Listen now! I am neither mad nor drunk! That book will make you famous.”

I said, “thank you,” as the native woman put the bundle into my arms.

“My only baby!” said McIntosh with a smile. He was sinking fast, but
he continued to talk as long as breath remained. I waited for the
end: knowing that, in six cases out of ten the dying man calls for his
mother. He turned on his side and said:--

“Say how it came into your possession. No one will believe you, but my
name, at least, will live. You will treat it brutally, I know you will.
Some of it must go; the public are fools and prudish fools. I was their
servant once. But do your mangling gently--very gently. It is a great
work, and I have paid for it in seven years' damnation.”

His voice stopped for ten or twelve breaths, and then he began mumbling
a prayer of some kind in Greek. The native woman cried very bitterly.
Lastly, he rose in bed and said, as loudly as slowly:--“Not guilty, my
Lord!”

Then he fell back, and the stupor held him till he died. The native
woman ran into the Serai among the horses and screamed and beat her
breasts; for she had loved him.

Perhaps his last sentence in life told what McIntosh had once gone
through; but, saving the big bundle of old sheets in the cloth, there
was nothing in his room to say who or what he had been.

The papers were in a hopeless muddle.

Strickland helped me to sort them, and he said that the writer was
either an extreme liar or a most wonderful person. He thought the
former. One of these days, you may be able to judge for yourself. The
bundle needed much expurgation and was full of Greek nonsense, at the
head of the chapters, which has all been cut out.

If the things are ever published some one may perhaps remember this
story, now printed as a safeguard to prove that McIntosh Jellaludin and
not I myself wrote the Book of Mother Maturin.

I don't want the Giant's Robe to come true in my case.

Snowdrop


It was the middle of winter, and the snowflakes were falling from the
sky like feathers. Now, a Queen sat sewing at a window framed in black
ebony, and as she sewed she looked out upon the snow. Suddenly she
pricked her finger and three drops of blood fell on to the snow. And
the red looked so lovely on the white that she thought to herself: 'If
only I had a child as white as snow and as red as blood, and as black
as the wood of the window frame!' Soon after, she had a daughter,
whose hair was black as ebony, while her cheeks were red as blood, and
her skin as white as snow; so she was called Snowdrop. But when the
child was born the Queen died. A year after the King took another
wife. She was a handsome woman, but proud and overbearing, and could
not endure that any one should surpass her in beauty. She had a magic
looking-glass, and when she stood before it and looked at herself she
used to say:

    'Mirror, Mirror on the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?'

then the Glass answered,

    'Queen, thou'rt fairest of them all.'

Then she was content, for she knew that the Looking-glass spoke the
truth.

But Snowdrop grew up and became more and more beautiful, so that when
she was seven years old she was as beautiful as the day, and far
surpassed the Queen. Once, when she asked her Glass,

    'Mirror, Mirror on the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?'

it answered--

    'Queen, thou art fairest here, I hold,
    But Snowdrop is fairer a thousandfold.'

Then the Queen was horror-struck, and turned green and yellow with
jealousy. From the hour that she saw Snowdrop her heart sank, and she
hated the little girl.

  [Illustration: 'Mirror, Mirror on the wall,
                 Who is fairest of us all?']

The pride and envy of her heart grew like a weed, so that she had no
rest day nor night. At last she called a Huntsman, and said: 'Take the
child out into the wood; I will not set eyes on her again; you must
kill her and bring me her lungs and liver as tokens.'

The Huntsman obeyed, and took Snowdrop out into the forest, but when
he drew his hunting-knife and was preparing to plunge it into her
innocent heart, she began to cry:

'Alas! dear Huntsman, spare my life, and I will run away into the wild
forest and never come back again.'

And because of her beauty the Huntsman had pity on her and said,
'Well, run away, poor child.' Wild beasts will soon devour you, he
thought, but still he felt as though a weight were lifted from his
heart because he had not been obliged to kill her. And as just at
that moment a young fawn came leaping by, he pierced it and took the
lungs and liver as tokens to the Queen. The Cook was ordered to serve
them up in pickle, and the wicked Queen ate them thinking that they
were Snowdrop's.

Now the poor child was alone in the great wood, with no living soul
near, and she was so frightened that she knew not what to do. Then she
began to run, and ran over the sharp stones and through the brambles,
while the animals passed her by without harming her. She ran as far as
her feet could carry her till it was nearly evening, when she saw a
little house and went in to rest. Inside, everything was small, but as
neat and clean as could be. A small table covered with a white cloth
stood ready with seven small plates, and by every plate was a spoon,
knife, fork, and cup. Seven little beds were ranged against the walls,
covered with snow-white coverlets. As Snowdrop was very hungry and
thirsty she ate a little bread and vegetable from each plate, and
drank a little wine from each cup, for she did not want to eat up the
whole of one portion. Then, being very tired, she lay down in one of
the beds. She tried them all but none suited her; one was too short,
another too long, all except the seventh, which was just right. She
remained in it, said her prayers, and fell asleep.

When it was quite dark the masters of the house came in. They were
seven Dwarfs, who used to dig in the mountains for ore. They kindled
their lights, and as soon as they could see they noticed that some one
had been there, for everything was not in the order in which they had
left it.

The first said, 'Who has been sitting in my chair?'

The second said, 'Who has been eating off my plate?'

The third said, 'Who has been nibbling my bread?'

The fourth said, 'Who has been eating my vegetables?'

The fifth said, 'Who has been using my fork?'

The sixth said, 'Who has been cutting with my knife?'

The seventh said, 'Who has been drinking out of my cup?'

  [Illustration: In the evening the seven Dwarfs came back.]

Then the first looked and saw a slight impression on his bed, and
said, 'Who has been treading on my bed?' The others came running up
and said, 'And mine, and mine.' But the seventh, when he looked into
his bed, saw Snowdrop, who lay there asleep. He called the others, who
came up and cried out with astonishment, as they held their lights
and gazed at Snowdrop. 'Heavens! what a beautiful child,' they said,
and they were so delighted that they did not wake her up but left her
asleep in bed. And the seventh Dwarf slept with his comrades, an hour
with each all through the night.

When morning came Snowdrop woke up, and when she saw the seven Dwarfs
she was frightened.

But they were very kind and asked her name.

'I am called Snowdrop,' she answered.

'How did you get into our house?' they asked.

Then she told them how her stepmother had wished to get rid of her,
how the Huntsman had spared her life, and how she had run all day till
she had found the house.

Then the Dwarfs said, 'Will you look after our household, cook, make
the beds, wash, sew and knit, and keep everything neat and clean? If
so you shall stay with us and want for nothing.'

'Yes,' said Snowdrop, 'with all my heart'; and she stayed with them
and kept the house in order.

In the morning they went to the mountain and searched for copper and
gold, and in the evening they came back and then their meal had to be
ready. All day the maiden was alone, and the good Dwarfs warned her
and said, 'Beware of your stepmother, who will soon learn that you are
here. Don't let any one in.'

But the Queen, having, as she imagined, eaten Snowdrop's liver and
lungs, and feeling certain that she was the fairest of all, stepped in
front of her Glass, and asked--

    'Mirror, Mirror on the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?'

the Glass answered as usual--

    'Queen, thou art fairest here, I hold,
    But Snowdrop over the fells,
    Who with the seven Dwarfs dwells,
    Is fairer still a thousandfold.'

She was dismayed, for she knew that the Glass told no lies, and she
saw that the Hunter had deceived her and that Snowdrop still lived.
Accordingly she began to wonder afresh how she might compass her
death; for as long as she was not the fairest in the land her jealous
heart left her no rest. At last she thought of a plan. She dyed her
face and dressed up like an old Pedlar, so that she was quite
unrecognisable. In this guise she crossed over the seven mountains to
the home of the seven Dwarfs and called out, 'Wares for sale.'

Snowdrop peeped out of the window and said, 'Good-day, mother, what
have you got to sell?'

'Good wares, fine wares,' she answered, 'laces of every colour'; and
she held out one which was made of gay plaited silk.

'I may let the honest woman in,' thought Snowdrop, and she unbolted
the door and bought the pretty lace.

'Child,' said the Old Woman, 'what a sight you are, I will lace you
properly for once.'

Snowdrop made no objection, and placed herself before the Old Woman to
let her lace her with the new lace. But the Old Woman laced so quickly
and tightly that she took away Snowdrop's breath and she fell down as
though dead.

'Now I am the fairest,' she said to herself, and hurried away.

Not long after the seven Dwarfs came home, and were horror-struck when
they saw their dear little Snowdrop lying on the floor without
stirring, like one dead. When they saw she was laced too tight they
cut the lace, whereupon she began to breathe and soon came back to
life again. When the Dwarfs heard what had happened, they said that
the old Pedlar was no other than the wicked Queen. 'Take care not to
let any one in when we are not here,' they said.

Now the wicked Queen, as soon as she got home, went to the Glass and
asked--

    'Mirror, Mirror on the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?'

and it answered as usual--

    'Queen, thou art fairest here, I hold,
    But Snowdrop over the fells,
    Who with the seven Dwarfs dwells,
    Is fairer still a thousandfold.'

When she heard it all her blood flew to her heart, so enraged was she,
for she knew that Snowdrop had come back to life again. Then she
thought to herself, 'I must plan something which will put an end to
her.' By means of witchcraft, in which she was skilled, she made a
poisoned comb. Next she disguised herself and took the form of a
different Old Woman. She crossed the mountains and came to the home of
the seven Dwarfs, and knocked at the door calling out, 'Good wares to
sell.'

Snowdrop looked out of the window and said, 'Go away, I must not let
any one in.'

'At least you may look,' answered the Old Woman, and she took the
poisoned comb and held it up.

The child was so pleased with it that she let herself be beguiled, and
opened the door.

When she had made a bargain the Old Woman said, 'Now I will comb your
hair properly for once.'

Poor Snowdrop, suspecting no evil, let the Old Woman have her way, but
scarcely was the poisoned comb fixed in her hair than the poison took
effect, and the maiden fell down unconscious.

'You paragon of beauty,' said the wicked woman, 'now it is all over
with you,' and she went away.

Happily it was near the time when the seven Dwarfs came home. When
they saw Snowdrop lying on the ground as though dead, they immediately
suspected her stepmother, and searched till they found the poisoned
comb. No sooner had they removed it than Snowdrop came to herself
again and related what had happened. They warned her again to be on
her guard, and to open the door to no one.

When she got home the Queen stood before her Glass and said--

    'Mirror, Mirror on the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?'

and it answered as usual--

    'Queen, thou art fairest here, I hold,
    But Snowdrop over the fells,
    Who with the seven Dwarfs dwells,
    Is fairer still a thousandfold.'

When she heard the Glass speak these words she trembled and quivered
with rage. 'Snowdrop shall die,' she said, 'even if it cost me my own
life.' Thereupon she went into a secret room, which no one ever
entered but herself, and made a poisonous apple. Outwardly it was
beautiful to look upon, with rosy cheeks, and every one who saw it
longed for it, but whoever ate of it was certain to die. When the
apple was ready she dyed her face and dressed herself like an old
Peasant Woman and so crossed the seven hills to the Dwarfs' home.
There she knocked.

Snowdrop put her head out of the window and said, 'I must not let any
one in, the seven Dwarfs have forbidden me.'

'It is all the same to me,' said the Peasant Woman. 'I shall soon get
rid of my apples. There, I will give you one.'

'No; I must not take anything.'

'Are you afraid of poison?' said the woman. 'See, I will cut the apple
in half: you eat the red side and I will keep the other.'

Now the apple was so cunningly painted that the red half alone was
poisoned. Snowdrop longed for the apple, and when she saw the Peasant
Woman eating she could hold out no longer, stretched out her hand and
took the poisoned half. Scarcely had she put a bit into her mouth than
she fell dead to the ground.

The Queen looked with a fiendish glance, and laughed aloud and said,
'White as snow, red as blood, and black as ebony, this time the
Dwarfs cannot wake you up again.' And when she got home and asked the
Looking-glass--

    'Mirror, Mirror on the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?'

it answered at last--

    'Queen, thou'rt fairest of them all.'

Then her jealous heart was at rest, as much at rest as a jealous heart
can be. The Dwarfs, when they came at evening, found Snowdrop lying on
the ground and not a breath escaped her lips, and she was quite dead.
They lifted her up and looked to see whether any poison was to be
found, unlaced her dress, combed her hair, washed her with wine and
water, but it was no use; their dear child was dead. They laid her on
a bier, and all seven sat down and bewailed her and lamented over her
for three whole days. Then they prepared to bury her, but she looked
so fresh and living, and still had such beautiful rosy cheeks, that
they said, 'We cannot bury her in the dark earth.' And so they had a
transparent glass coffin made, so that she could be seen from every
side, laid her inside and wrote on it in letters of gold her name and
how she was a King's daughter. Then they set the coffin out on the
mountain, and one of them always stayed by and watched it. And the
birds came too and mourned for Snowdrop, first an owl, then a raven,
and lastly a dove.

Now Snowdrop lay a long, long time in her coffin, looking as though
she were asleep. It happened that a Prince was wandering in the wood,
and came to the home of the seven Dwarfs to pass the night. He saw the
coffin on the mountain and lovely Snowdrop inside, and read what was
written in golden letters. Then he said to the Dwarfs, 'Let me have
the coffin; I will give you whatever you like for it.'

But they said, 'We will not give it up for all the gold of the world.'

Then he said, 'Then give it to me as a gift, for I cannot live
without Snowdrop to gaze upon; and I will honour and reverence it as
my dearest treasure.'

When he had said these words the good Dwarfs pitied him and gave him
the coffin.

The Prince bade his servants carry it on their shoulders. Now it
happened that they stumbled over some brushwood, and the shock
dislodged the piece of apple from Snowdrop's throat. In a short time
she opened her eyes, lifted the lid of the coffin, sat up and came
back to life again completely.

'O Heaven! where am I?' she asked.

The Prince, full of joy, said, 'You are with me,' and he related what
had happened, and then said, 'I love you better than all the world;
come with me to my father's castle and be my wife.'

Snowdrop agreed and went with him, and their wedding was celebrated
with great magnificence. Snowdrop's wicked stepmother was invited to
the feast; and when she had put on her fine clothes she stepped to her
Glass and asked--

    'Mirror, Mirror on the wall,
    Who is fairest of us all?'

The Glass answered--

    'Queen, thou art fairest here, I hold,
    The young Queen fairer a thousandfold.'

Then the wicked woman uttered a curse, and was so terribly frightened
that she didn't know what to do. Yet she had no rest: she felt obliged
to go and see the young Queen. And when she came in she recognised
Snowdrop, and stood stock still with fear and terror. But iron
slippers were heated over the fire, and were soon brought in with
tongs and put before her. And she had to step into the red-hot shoes
and dance till she fell down dead.




The Pink


There was once a Queen, who had not been blessed with children. As she
walked in her garden, she prayed every morning that a son or daughter
might be given to her. Then one day an Angel came, and said to her:
'Be content: you shall have a son, and he shall be endowed with the
power of wishing, so that whatsoever he wishes for shall be granted to
him.' She hurried to the King, and told him the joyful news; and when
the time came a son was born to them, and they were filled with
delight.

Every morning the Queen used to take her little son into the gardens,
where the wild animals were kept, to bathe him in a clear, sparkling
fountain. It happened one day, when the child was a little older, that
as she sat with him on her lap she fell asleep.

The old Cook, who knew that the child had the power of wishing, came
by and stole it; he also killed a Chicken, and dropped some of its
blood on the Queen's garments. Then he took the child away to a secret
place, where he placed it out to be nursed. Then he ran back to the
King, and accused the Queen of having allowed her child to be carried
off by a wild animal.

When the King saw the blood on the Queen's garments he believed the
story, and was overwhelmed with anger. He caused a high tower to be
built, into which neither the sun nor the moon could penetrate. Then
he ordered his wife to be shut up in it, and the door walled up. She
was to stay there for seven years, without eating or drinking, so as
gradually to pine away. But two Angels from heaven, in the shape of
white doves, came to her, bringing food twice a day till the seven
years were ended.

Meanwhile the Cook thought, 'If the child really has the power of
wishing, and I stay here, I might easily fall into disgrace.' So he
left the palace, and went to the boy, who was then old enough to talk,
and said to him, 'Wish for a beautiful castle, with a garden, and
everything belonging to it.' Hardly had the words passed the boy's
lips than all that he had asked for was there.

After a time the Cook said, 'It is not good for you to be so much
alone; wish for a beautiful Maiden to be your companion.'

The Prince uttered the wish, and immediately a Maiden stood before
them, more beautiful than any painter could paint. So they grew very
fond of each other, and played together, while the old Cook went out
hunting like any grand gentleman. But the idea came to him one day
that the Prince might wish to go to his father some time, and he would
thereby be placed in a very awkward position. So he took the Maiden
aside, and said to her, 'To-night, when the boy is asleep, go and
drive this knife into his heart. Then bring me his heart and his
tongue. If you fail to do it, you will lose your own life.'

Then he went away; but when the next day came the Maiden had not yet
obeyed his command, and she said, 'Why should I shed his innocent
blood, when he has never done harm to any creature in his life?'

The Cook again said, 'If you do not obey me, you will lose your own
life.'

When he had gone away, she ordered a young hind to be brought and
killed; then she cut out its heart and its tongue, and put them on a
dish. When she saw the old man coming she said to the boy, 'Get into
bed, and cover yourself right over.'

The old scoundrel came in and said, 'Where are the tongue and the
heart of the boy?'

  [Illustration: The scullions brought live coals, which he had to eat
    till the flames poured out of his mouth.]

The Maiden gave him the dish; but the Prince threw off the coverings,
and said, 'You old sinner, why did you want to kill me? Now hear your
sentence. You shall be turned into a black Poodle, with a gold chain
round your neck, and you shall be made to eat live coals, so that
flames of fire may come out of your mouth.'

As he said the words, the old man was changed into a black Poodle,
with a gold chain round his neck; and the scullions brought live
coals, which he had to eat till the flames poured out of his mouth.

The Prince stayed on at the castle for a time, thinking of his mother,
and wondering if she were still alive. At last he said to the Maiden,
'I am going into my own country. If you like you can go with me; I
will take you.'

She answered: 'Alas! it is so far off, and what should I do in a
strange country where I know no one?'

As she did not wish to go, and yet they could not bear to be parted,
he changed her into a beautiful Pink, which he took with him.

Then he set out on his journey, and the Poodle was made to run
alongside till the Prince reached his own country.

Arrived there, he went straight to the tower where his mother was
imprisoned, and as the tower was so high he wished for a ladder to
reach the top. Then he climbed up, looked in, and cried, 'Dearest
mother, lady Queen, are you still alive?'

She, thinking it was the Angels who brought her food come back, said,
'I have just eaten; I do not want anything more.'

Then he said, 'I am your own dear son whom the wild animals were
supposed to have devoured; but I am still alive, and I shall soon come
and rescue you.'

Then he got down and went to his father. He had himself announced as a
strange Huntsman, anxious to take service with the King, who said,
'Yes; if he was skilled in game preserving, and could procure plenty
of venison, he would engage him. But there had never before been any
game in the whole district.'

The Huntsman promised to procure as much game as the King could
possibly require for the royal table.

Then he called the whole Hunt together, and ordered them all to come
into the forest with him. He caused a great circle to be enclosed,
with only one outlet; then he took his place in the middle, and began
to wish as hard as he could. Immediately over two hundred head of game
came running into the enclosure; these the Huntsmen had to shoot, and
then they were piled on to sixty country wagons, and driven home to
the King. So for once he was able to load his board with game, after
having had none for many years.

The King was much pleased, and commanded his whole court to a banquet
on the following day. When they were all assembled, he said to the
Huntsman, 'You shall sit by me as you are so clever.'

He answered, 'My lord and King, may it please your Majesty, I am only
a poor Huntsman!'

The King, however, insisted, and said, 'I command you to sit by me.'

As he sat there, his thoughts wandered to his dear mother, and he
wished one of the courtiers would speak of her. Hardly had he wished
it than the Lord High Marshal said--

'Your Majesty, we are all rejoicing here, how fares it with Her
Majesty the Queen? Is she still alive in the tower, or has she
perished?'

But the King answered, 'She allowed my beloved son to be devoured by
wild animals, and I do not wish to hear anything about her.'

Then the Huntsman stood up and said--

'Gracious father, she is still alive, and I am her son. He was not
devoured by wild animals; he was taken away by the scoundrel of a
Cook. He stole me while my mother was asleep, and sprinkled her
garments with the blood of a chicken.' Then he brought up the black
Poodle with the golden chain, and said, 'This is the villain.'

He ordered some live coals to be brought, which he made the dog eat in
the sight of all the people till the flames poured out of his mouth.
Then he asked the King if he would like to see the Cook in his true
shape, and wished him back, and there he stood in his white apron,
with his knife at his side.

The King was furious when he saw him, and ordered him to be thrown
into the deepest dungeon. Then the Huntsman said further--

'My father would you like to see the Maiden who so tenderly saved my
life when she was ordered to kill me, although by so doing she might
have lost her own life?'

The King answered, 'Yes, I will gladly see her.'

Then his son said, 'Gracious father, I will show her to you first in
the guise of a beautiful flower.'

He put his hand into his pocket, and brought out the Pink. It was a
finer one than the King had ever seen before. Then his son said, 'Now,
I will show her to you in her true form.'

The moment his wish was uttered, she stood before them in all her
beauty, which was greater than any artist could paint.

The King sent ladies and gentlemen-in-waiting to the tower to bring
the Queen back to his royal table. But when they reached the tower
they found that she would no longer eat or drink, and she said, 'The
merciful God, who has preserved my life so long, will soon release me
now.'

Three days after she died. At her burial the two white Doves which had
brought her food during her captivity, followed and hovered over her
grave.

The old King caused the wicked Cook to be torn into four quarters; but
his own heart was filled with grief and remorse, and he died soon
after.

His son married the beautiful Maiden he had brought home with him as a
Flower, and, for all I know, they may be living still.




Briar Rose


A long time ago there lived a King and Queen, who said every day, 'If
only we had a child'; but for a long time they had none.

It fell out once, as the Queen was bathing, that a frog crept out of
the water on to the land, and said to her: 'Your wish shall be
fulfilled; before a year has passed you shall bring a daughter into
the world.'

The frog's words came true. The Queen had a little girl who was so
beautiful that the King could not contain himself for joy, and
prepared a great feast. He invited not only his relations, friends,
and acquaintances, but the fairies, in order that they might be
favourably and kindly disposed towards the child. There were thirteen
of them in the kingdom, but as the King had only twelve golden plates
for them to eat from, one of the fairies had to stay at home.

The feast was held with all splendour, and when it came to an end the
fairies all presented the child with a magic gift. One gave her
virtue, another beauty, a third riches, and so on, with everything in
the world that she could wish for.

When eleven of the fairies had said their say, the thirteenth suddenly
appeared. She wanted to revenge herself for not having been invited.
Without greeting any one, or even glancing at the company, she called
out in a loud voice: 'The Princess shall prick herself with a distaff
in her fifteenth year and shall fall down dead'; and without another
word she turned and left the hall.

Every one was terror-struck, but the twelfth fairy, whose wish was
still unspoken, stepped forward. She could not cancel the curse, but
could only soften it, so she said: 'It shall not be death, but a deep
sleep lasting a hundred years, into which your daughter shall fall.'

  [Illustration: 'The Thirteenth Fairy.']

The King was so anxious to guard his dear child from the misfortune,
that he sent out a command that all the distaffs in the whole kingdom
should be burned.

  [Illustration: {The King could not contain himself for joy.}]

As time went on all the promises of the fairies came true. The
Princess grew up so beautiful, modest, kind, and clever that every
one who saw her could not but love her. Now it happened that on the
very day when she was fifteen years old the King and Queen were away
from home, and the Princess was left quite alone in the castle. She
wandered about over the whole place, looking at rooms and halls as she
pleased, and at last she came to an old tower. She ascended a narrow,
winding staircase and reached a little door. A rusty key was sticking
in the lock, and when she turned it the door flew open. In a little
room sat an old woman with a spindle, spinning her flax busily.

'Good day, Granny,' said the Princess; 'what are you doing?'

'I am spinning,' said the old woman, and nodded her head.

'What is the thing that whirls round so merrily?' asked the Princess;
and she took the spindle and tried to spin too.

But she had scarcely touched it before the curse was fulfilled, and
she pricked her finger with the spindle. The instant she felt the
prick she fell upon the bed which was standing near, and lay still in
a deep sleep which spread over the whole castle.

The King and Queen, who had just come home and had stepped into the
hall, went to sleep, and all their courtiers with them. The horses
went to sleep in the stable, the dogs in the yard, the doves on the
roof, the flies on the wall; yes, even the fire flickering on the
hearth grew still and went to sleep, and the roast meat stopped
crackling; the cook, who was pulling the scullion's hair because he
had made some mistake, let him go and went to sleep. The wind dropped,
and on the trees in front of the castle not a leaf stirred.

But round the castle a hedge of briar roses began to grow up; every
year it grew higher, till at last it surrounded the whole castle so
that nothing could be seen of it, not even the flags on the roof.

But there was a legend in the land about the lovely sleeping Briar
Rose, as the King's daughter was called, and from time to time princes
came and tried to force a way through the hedge into the castle. They
found it impossible, for the thorns, as though they had hands, held
them fast, and the princes remained caught in them without being able
to free themselves, and so died a miserable death.

  [Illustration: But round the castle a hedge of briar roses began to
    grow up.]

After many, many years a Prince came again to the country and heard an
old man tell of the castle which stood behind the briar hedge, in
which a most beautiful maiden called Briar Rose had been asleep for
the last hundred years, and with her slept the King, Queen, and all
her courtiers. He knew also, from his grandfather, that many princes
had already come and sought to pierce through the briar hedge, and had
remained caught in it and died a sad death.

Then the young Prince said, 'I am not afraid; I am determined to go
and look upon the lovely Briar Rose.'

  [Illustration: {The young Prince said, 'I am not afraid; I am
    determined to go and look upon the lovely Briar Rose.'}]

The good old man did all in his power to dissuade him, but the Prince
would not listen to his words.

Now, however, the hundred years were just ended, and the day had come
when Briar Rose was to wake up again. When the Prince approached the
briar hedge it was in blossom, and was covered with beautiful large
flowers which made way for him of their own accord and let him pass
unharmed, and then closed up again into a hedge behind him.

In the courtyard he saw the horses and brindled hounds lying asleep,
on the roof sat the doves with their heads under their wings: and when
he went into the house the flies were asleep on the walls, and near
the throne lay the King and Queen; in the kitchen was the cook, with
his hand raised as though about to strike the scullion, and the maid
sat with the black fowl in her lap which she was about to pluck.

He went on further, and all was so still that he could hear his own
breathing. At last he reached the tower, and opened the door into the
little room where Briar Rose was asleep. There she lay, looking so
beautiful that he could not take his eyes off her; he bent down and
gave her a kiss. As he touched her, Briar Rose opened her eyes and
looked lovingly at him. Then they went down together; and the King
woke up, and the Queen, and all the courtiers, and looked at each
other with astonished eyes. The horses in the stable stood up and
shook themselves, the hounds leaped about and wagged their tails, the
doves on the roof lifted their heads from under their wings, looked
round, and flew into the fields; the flies on the walls began to crawl
again, the fire in the kitchen roused itself and blazed up and cooked
the food, the meat began to crackle, and the cook boxed the scullion's
ears so soundly that he screamed aloud, while the maid finished
plucking the fowl. Then the wedding of the Prince and Briar Rose was
celebrated with all splendour, and they lived happily till they died.




The Jew among the Thorns


There was once a rich Man, and he had a Servant who served him well
and faithfully. He was first up in the morning, and last to go to bed
at night. If there was any hard work to be done which no one else
would do, he was always ready to undertake it. He never made any
complaint, but was always merry and content.

When his year of service was over, his Master did not give him any
wages, thinking: 'This is my wisest plan. I save by it, and he is not
likely to run away.'

The Servant said nothing, and served the second year like the first.
And when at the end of the second he again received no wages, he still
appeared contented, and stayed on. When the third year had passed, the
Master bethought himself, and put his hand into his pocket, but he
brought it out empty.

At last the Servant said: 'Master, I have served you well and truly
for three years; please pay me my wages. I want to go away and look
about the world a bit.'

The Miser answered: 'Yes, my good fellow, you have served me honestly,
and you shall be liberally rewarded.'

Again he put his hand into his pocket, and counted three farthings,
one by one, into the Servant's hand, and said: 'There, you have a
farthing for every year; that is better wages than you would get from
most masters.'

The good Servant, who knew little about money, put away his fortune,
and thought: 'Now my pocket is well filled, I need no longer trouble
myself about work.' Then he left and went singing down the hill, and
dancing, in the lightness of his heart.

Now it so happened that as he was passing a thicket, that a little
Mannikin came out and cried: 'Whither away, my merry fellow? I see
your troubles are not too heavy to be borne.'

'Why should I be sad?' answered the Servant. 'I have three years'
wages in my pocket.'

'And how much is your treasure?' asked the Mannikin.

'How much? Why, three good farthings.'

'Listen!' said the Mannikin. 'I am a poor needy fellow; give me your
three farthings. I can't work any more; but you are young, and can
easily earn your bread.'

Now the Servant had a good heart, and he was sorry for the poor little
man, so he gave him his three farthings, and said:

'Take them, in the name of heaven! I shall not miss them.'

'Then,' said the Mannikin, 'I see what a good heart you have. I will
give you three wishes, one for each farthing; and every wish shall be
fulfilled.'

'Aha!' said the Servant, 'you are a wonder-worker I see. Very well,
then. First, I wish for a gun which will hit everything I aim at;
secondly, for a fiddle which will make every one dance when I play;
and, thirdly, if I ask anything of any one, that he shall not be able
to refuse my request.'

'You shall have them all,' said the Mannikin, diving into the bushes,
where, wonderful to relate, lay the gun and the fiddle ready, just as
if they had been ordered beforehand. He gave them to the Servant, and
said: 'No one will be able to refuse anything you ask.'

'Heart alive! what more can one desire,' said the Servant to himself,
as he went merrily on.

Soon after, he met a Jew with a long goat's beard, who was standing
still listening to the song of a bird sitting on the top of a tree.
'Good heavens!' he was saying, 'what a tremendous noise such a tiny
creature makes. If only it were mine! If one could but put some salt
upon its tail!'

'If that is all,' said the Servant, 'the bird shall soon come down.'

He took aim, and down fell the bird into a quickset hedge.

'Go, you rogue,' he said to the Jew, 'and pick up the bird.'

'Leave out the "rogue," young man. I will get the bird sure enough, as
you have killed it for me,' said the Jew.

He lay down on the ground and began to creep into the hedge.

  [Illustration: The Jew was forced to spring up and begin to dance.]

When he had got well among the thorns, a spirit of mischief seized the
Servant, and he began to play his fiddle with all his might. The Jew
was forced to spring up and begin to dance, and the more the Servant
played, the faster he had to dance. The thorns tore his shabby coat,
combed his goat's beard, and scratched him all over.

'Merciful Heavens!' cried the Jew. 'Leave off that fiddling! I don't
want to dance, my good fellow.'

But the Servant paid no attention to him, but thought: 'You have
fleeced plenty of people in your time, my man, and the thorns shan't
spare you now!' And he played on and on, so that the Jew had to jump
higher and higher, till his coat hung in ribbons about him.

'I cry "enough!"' screamed the Jew. 'I will give you anything you like
if you will only stop. Take the purse, it is full of gold.'

'Oh, well, if you are so open-handed,' said the Servant, 'I am quite
ready to stop my music, but I must say in praise of your dancing, that
it has quite a style of its own.' Then he took the purse and went on
his way.

The Jew stood still looking after him till he was a good way off, then
he screamed with all his might: 'You miserable fiddler! Just you wait
till I find you alone! I will chase you till the soles of your shoes
drop off--you rascal!' And he went on pouring out a stream of abuse.
Having relieved himself by so doing, he hurried off to the Judge in
the nearest town.

'Just look here, your worship,' he said, 'look how I have been
attacked, and ill-treated, and robbed on the high road by a wretch. My
condition might melt the heart of a stone; my clothes and my body torn
and scratched, and my purse with all my poor little savings taken away
from me. All my beautiful ducats, each one prettier than the other. Oh
dear! Oh dear! For heaven's sake, put the wretch in prison.'

The Judge said: 'Was it a soldier who punished you so with his sword?'

'Heaven preserve us!' cried the Jew, 'he had no sword, but he had a
gun on his shoulder and a fiddle round his neck. The villain is easily
to be recognised.'

So the Judge sent out men in pursuit of the honest Servant, who had
walked on slowly. They soon overtook him, and the purse of gold was
found on him. When he was brought before the Judge, he said--

'I never touched the Jew, nor did I take his money away; he offered it
to me of his own free will if I would only stop playing, because he
could not bear my music.'

'Heaven defend us!' screamed the Jew, 'his lies are as thick as flies
on the wall.'

And the Judge did not believe him either, and said:

'That is a very lame excuse; no Jew ever did such a thing.' So he
sentenced the honest Servant to the gallows for having committed a
robbery upon the king's highway.

When he was being led away, the Jew screamed after him; 'You vagabond,
you dog of a fiddler, now you will get your deserts!'

The Servant mounted the ladder to the gallows quite quietly, with the
halter round his neck; but at the last rung he turned round and said
to the Judge: 'Grant me one favour before I die.'

'Certainly,' said the Judge, 'as long as you don't ask for your life.'

'Not my life,' answered the Servant. 'I only ask to play my fiddle
once more.'

  [Illustration: Dancing as hard as he could.]

The Jew raised a tremendous cry. 'Don't allow it, your worship, for
heaven's sake, don't allow it!'

But the Judge said: 'Why should I deny him that short pleasure? His
wish is granted, and there's an end of the matter!'

He could not have refused even if he had wished, because of the
Mannikin's gift to the Servant.

The Jew screamed, 'Oh dear! Oh dear! Tie me tight, tie me tight!'

The good Servant took his fiddle from his neck, and put it into
position, and at the first chord everybody began to wag their heads,
the Judge, his Clerk, and all the Officers of Justice, and the rope
fell out of the hand of the man about to bind the Jew.

At the second scrape, they all lifted their legs, and the Hangman let
go his hold of the honest Servant, to make ready to dance.

At the third scrape they one and all leapt into the air, and began to
caper about, the Judge and the Jew at the head, and they all leapt
their best.

Soon, every one who had come to the market-place out of curiosity, old
and young, fat and lean, were dancing as hard as they could; even the
dogs got upon their hind legs, and pranced about with the rest. The
longer he played, the higher they jumped, till they knocked their
heads together, and made each other cry out.

At last the Judge, quite out of breath, cried: 'I will give you your
life, if only you will stop playing.'

The honest Servant allowed himself to be prevailed upon, laid his
fiddle aside, and came down the ladder. Then he went up to the Jew,
who lay upon the ground gasping, and said to him:

'You rascal, confess where you got the money, or I will begin to play
again.'

'I stole it! I stole it!' he screamed; 'but you have honestly earned
it.'

The Judge then ordered the Jew to the gallows to be hanged as a thief.




Ashenputtel


The wife of a rich man fell ill, and when she felt that she was
nearing her end, she called her only daughter to her bedside, and
said:

'Dear child, continue devout and good, then God will always help you,
and I will look down upon you from heaven, and watch over you.'

Thereupon she closed her eyes, and breathed her last.

The maiden went to her mother's grave every day and wept, and she
continued to be devout and good. When the winter came, the snow spread
a white covering on the grave, and when the sun of spring had unveiled
it again, the husband took another wife. The new wife brought home
with her two daughters, who were fair and beautiful to look upon, but
base and black at heart.

Then began a sad time for the unfortunate step-child.

'Is this stupid goose to sit with us in the parlour?' they said.

'Whoever wants to eat bread must earn it; go and sit with the
kitchenmaid.'

They took away her pretty clothes, and made her put on an old grey
frock, and gave her wooden clogs.

'Just look at the proud Princess, how well she's dressed,' they
laughed, as they led her to the kitchen. There, the girl was obliged
to do hard work from morning till night, to get up at daybreak, carry
water, light the fire, cook, and wash. Not content with that, the
sisters inflicted on her every vexation they could think of; they made
fun of her, and tossed the peas and lentils among the ashes, so that
she had to sit down and pick them out again. In the evening, when she
was worn out with work, she had no bed to go to, but had to lie on the
hearth among the cinders. And because, on account of that, she always
looked dusty and dirty, they called her Ashenputtel.

It happened one day that the Father had a mind to go to the Fair. So
he asked both his step-daughters what he should bring home for them.

'Fine clothes,' said one.

'Pearls and jewels,' said the other.

'But you, Ashenputtel?' said he, 'what will you have?'

'Father, break off for me the first twig which brushes against your
hat on your way home.'

Well, for his two step-daughters he brought beautiful clothes, pearls
and jewels, and on his way home, as he was riding through a green
copse, a hazel twig grazed against him and knocked his hat off. Then
he broke off the branch and took it with him.

When he got home he gave his step-daughters what they had asked for,
and to Ashenputtel he gave the twig from the hazel bush.

Ashenputtel thanked him, and went to her mother's grave and planted
the twig upon it; she wept so much that her tears fell and watered it.
And it took root and became a fine tree.

Ashenputtel went to the grave three times every day, wept and prayed,
and every time a little white bird came and perched upon the tree, and
when she uttered a wish, the little bird threw down to her what she
had wished for.

Now it happened that the King proclaimed a festival, which was to last
three days, and to which all the beautiful maidens in the country were
invited, in order that his son might choose a bride.

When the two step-daughters heard that they were also to be present,
they were in high spirits, called Ashenputtel, and said:

'Brush our hair and clean our shoes, and fasten our buckles, for we
are going to the feast at the King's palace.'

Ashenputtel obeyed, but wept, for she also would gladly have gone to
the ball with them, and begged her Step-mother to give her leave to
go.

'You, Ashenputtel!' she said. 'Why, you are covered with dust and
dirt. You go to the festival! Besides you have no clothes or shoes,
and yet you want to go to the ball.'

As she, however, went on asking, her Step-mother said:

'Well, I have thrown a dishful of lentils into the cinders, if you
have picked them all out in two hours you shall go with us.'

The girl went through the back door into the garden, and cried, 'Ye
gentle doves, ye turtle doves, and all ye little birds under heaven,
come and help me,

    'The good into a dish to throw,
    The bad into your crops can go.'

Then two white doves came in by the kitchen window, and were followed
by the turtle doves, and finally all the little birds under heaven
flocked in, chirping, and settled down among the ashes. And the doves
gave a nod with their little heads, peck, peck, peck; and then the
rest began also, peck, peck, peck, and collected all the good beans
into the dish. Scarcely had an hour passed before they had finished,
and all flown out again.

Then the girl brought the dish to her Step-mother, and was delighted
to think that now she would be able to go to the feast with them.

But she said, 'No, Ashenputtel, you have no clothes, and cannot dance;
you will only be laughed at.'

But when she began to cry, the Step-mother said:

'If you can pick out two whole dishes of lentils from the ashes in an
hour, you shall go with us.'

And she thought, 'She will never be able to do that.'

  [Illustration: {Ashenputtel goes to the ball.}]

When her Step-mother had thrown the dishes of lentils among the
ashes, the girl went out through the back door, and cried, 'Ye gentle
doves, ye turtle doves, and all ye little birds under heaven, come and
help me,

    'The good into a dish to throw,
    The bad into your crops can go.'

Then two white doves came in by the kitchen window, and were followed
by the turtle doves, and all the other little birds under heaven, and
in less than an hour the whole had been picked up, and they had all
flown away.

Then the girl carried the dish to her Step-mother, and was delighted
to think that she would now be able to go to the ball.

But she said, 'It's not a bit of good. You can't go with us, for
you've got no clothes, and you can't dance. We should be quite ashamed
of you.'

Thereupon she turned her back upon her, and hurried off with her two
proud daughters.

As soon as every one had left the house, Ashenputtel went out to her
mother's grave under the hazel-tree, and cried:

    'Shiver and shake, dear little tree,
    Gold and silver shower on me.'

Then the bird threw down to her a gold and silver robe, and a pair of
slippers embroidered with silk and silver. With all speed she put on
the robe and went to the feast. But her step-sisters and their mother
did not recognise her, and supposed that she was some foreign
Princess, so beautiful did she appear in her golden dress. They never
gave a thought to Ashenputtel, but imagined that she was sitting at
home in the dirt picking the lentils out of the cinders.

The Prince came up to the stranger, took her by the hand, and danced
with her. In fact, he would not dance with any one else, and never
left go of her hand. If any one came up to ask her to dance, he said,
'This is my partner.'

She danced until nightfall, and then wanted to go home; but the Prince
said, 'I will go with you and escort you.'

For he wanted to see to whom the beautiful maiden belonged. But she
slipped out of his way and sprang into the pigeon-house.

Then the Prince waited till her Father came, and told him that the
unknown maiden had vanished into the pigeon-house.

The old man thought, 'Could it be Ashenputtel?' And he had an axe
brought to him, so that he might break down the pigeon-house, but
there was no one inside.

When they went home, there lay Ashenputtel in her dirty clothes among
the cinders, and a dismal oil lamp was burning in the chimney corner.
For Ashenputtel had quietly jumped down out of the pigeon-house and
ran back to the hazel-tree. There she had taken off her beautiful
clothes and laid them on the grave, and the bird had taken them away
again. Then she had settled herself among the ashes on the hearth in
her old grey frock.

On the second day, when the festival was renewed, and her parents and
step-sisters had started forth again, Ashenputtel went to the
hazel-tree, and said:

    'Shiver and shake, dear little tree,
    Gold and silver shower on me.'

Then the bird threw down a still more gorgeous robe than on the
previous day. And when she appeared at the festival in this robe,
every one was astounded by her beauty.

The King's son had waited till she came, and at once took her hand,
and she danced with no one but him. When others came forward and
invited her to dance, he said, 'This is my partner.'

At nightfall she wished to leave; but the Prince went after her,
hoping to see into what house she went, but she sprang out into the
garden behind the house. There stood a fine big tree on which the most
delicious pears hung. She climbed up among the branches as nimbly as a
squirrel, and the Prince could not make out what had become of her.

But he waited till her Father came, and then said to him, 'The
unknown maiden has slipped away from me, and I think that she has
jumped into the pear-tree.'

The Father thought, 'Can it be Ashenputtel?' And he had the axe
brought to cut down the tree, but there was no one on it. When they
went home and looked into the kitchen, there lay Ashenputtel among the
cinders as usual; for she had jumped down on the other side of the
tree, taken back the beautiful clothes to the bird on the hazel-tree,
and put on her old grey frock.

On the third day, when her parents and sisters had started,
Ashenputtel went again to her mother's grave, and said:

    'Shiver and shake, dear little tree,
    Gold and silver shower on me.'

Then the bird threw down a dress which was so magnificent that no one
had ever seen the like before, and the slippers were entirely of gold.
When she appeared at the festival in this attire, they were all
speechless with astonishment. The Prince danced only with her, and if
any one else asked her to dance, he said, 'This is my partner.'

When night fell and she wanted to leave, the Prince was more desirous
than ever to accompany her, but she darted away from him so quickly
that he could not keep up with her. But the Prince had used a
stratagem, and had caused the steps to be covered with cobbler's wax.
The consequence was, that as the maiden sprang down them, her left
slipper remained sticking there. The Prince took it up. It was small
and dainty, and entirely made of gold.

The next morning he went with it to Ashenputtel's Father, and said to
him, 'No other shall become my wife but she whose foot this golden
slipper fits.'

The two sisters were delighted at that, for they both had beautiful
feet. The eldest went into the room intending to try on the slipper,
and her Mother stood beside her. But her great toe prevented her
getting it on, her foot was too long.

Then her Mother handed her a knife, and said, 'Cut off the toe; when
you are Queen you won't have to walk any more.'

The girl cut off her toe, forced her foot into the slipper, stifled
her pain, and went out to the Prince. Then he took her up on his horse
as his Bride, and rode away with her.

However, they had to pass the grave on the way, and there sat the two
Doves on the hazel-tree, and cried:

    'Prithee, look back, prithee, look back,
    There's blood on the track,
    The shoe is too small,
    At home the true Bride is waiting thy call.'

Then he looked at her foot and saw how the blood was streaming from
it. So he turned his horse round and carried the false Bride back to
her home, and said that she was not the right one; the second sister
must try the shoe.

Then she went into the room, and succeeded in getting her toes into
the shoe, but her heel was too big.

Then her Mother handed her a knife, and said, 'Cut a bit off your
heel; when you are Queen you won't have to walk any more.'

The maiden cut a bit off her heel, forced her foot into the shoe,
stifled her pain, and went out to the Prince.

Then he took her up on his horse as his Bride, and rode off with her.

As they passed the grave, the two Doves were sitting on the
hazel-tree, and crying:

    'Prithee, look back, prithee, look back,
    There's blood on the track,
    The shoe is too small,
    At home the true Bride is waiting thy call.'

He looked down at her foot and saw that it was streaming with blood,
and there were deep red spots on her stockings. Then he turned his
horse and brought the false Bride back to her home.

'This is not the right one either,' he said. 'Have you no other
daughter?'

'No,' said the man. 'There is only a daughter of my late wife's, a
puny, stunted drudge, but she cannot possibly be the Bride.'

The Prince said that she must be sent for.

But the Mother answered, 'Oh no, she is much too dirty; she mustn't be
seen on any account.'

He was, however, absolutely determined to have his way, and they were
obliged to summon Ashenputtel.

When she had washed her hands and face, she went up and curtsied to
the Prince, who handed her the golden slipper.

Then she sat down on a bench, pulled off her wooden clog and put on
the slipper, which fitted to a nicety.

And when she stood up and the Prince looked into her face, he
recognised the beautiful maiden that he had danced with, and cried:
'This is the true Bride!'

The Step-mother and the two sisters were dismayed and turned white
with rage; but he took Ashenputtel on his horse and rode off with her.

As they rode past the hazel-tree the two White Doves cried:

    'Prithee, look back, prithee, look back,
    No blood's on the track,
    The shoe's _not_ too small,
    You carry the true Bride home to your hall.'

And when they had said this they both came flying down, and settled on
Ashenputtel's shoulders, one on the right, and one on the left, and
remained perched there.

When the wedding was going to take place, the two false sisters came
and wanted to curry favour with her, and take part in her good
fortune. As the bridal party was going to the church, the eldest was
on the right side, the youngest on the left, and the Doves picked out
one of the eyes of each of them.

Afterwards, when they were coming out of the church, the elder was on
the left, the younger on the right, and the Doves picked out the other
eye of each of them. And so for their wickedness and falseness they
were punished with blindness for the rest of their days.




The White Snake


A long time ago there lived a King whose wisdom was celebrated far and
wide. Nothing was unknown to him, and news of the most secret
transactions seemed to reach him through the air.

Now he had one very odd habit. Every day at dinner, when the courtiers
had withdrawn, and he was quite alone, a trusted Servant had to bring
in another dish. It was always covered, and even the Servant did not
know what it contained, nor any one else, for the King never uncovered
it till he was alone. This had gone on for a long time, when one day
the Servant who carried the dish was overcome by his curiosity, and
took the dish to his own room.

When he had carefully locked the door, he took the dish-cover off, and
saw a White Snake lying on the dish.

At the sight of it, he could not resist tasting it; so he cut a piece
off, and put it into his mouth.

Hardly had he tasted it, however, when he heard a wonderful whispering
of delicate voices.

He went to the window and listened, and he noticed that the whispers
came from the sparrows outside. They were chattering away, and telling
each other all kinds of things that they had heard in the woods and
fields. Eating the Snake had given him the power of understanding the
language of birds and animals.

Now it happened on this day that the Queen lost her most precious
ring, and suspicion fell upon this trusted Servant who went about
everywhere.

The King sent for him, and threatened that if it was not found by the
next day, he would be sent to prison.

In vain he protested his innocence; he was not believed.

In his grief and anxiety he went down into the courtyard and wondered
how he should get out of his difficulty.

A number of Ducks were lying peaceably together by a stream, stroking
down their feathers with their bills, while they chattered gaily.

The Servant stood still to listen to them. They were telling each
other of their morning's walks and experiences.

Then one of them said somewhat fretfully: 'I have something lying
heavy on my stomach. In my haste I swallowed the Queen's ring this
morning.'

The Servant quickly seized it by the neck, carried it off into the
kitchen, and said to the Cook: 'Here's a fine fat Duck. You had better
kill it at once.'

'Yes, indeed,' said the Cook, weighing it in her hand. 'It has spared
no pains in stuffing itself; it should have been roasted long ago.'

So she killed it, and cut it open, and there, sure enough, was the
Queen's ring.

The Servant had now no difficulty in proving his innocence, and the
King, to make up for his injustice, gave the Servant leave to ask any
favour he liked, and promised him the highest post about the Court
which he might desire.

The Servant, however, declined everything but a horse, and some money
to travel with, as he wanted to wander about for a while, to see the
world.

His request being granted, he set off on his travels, and one day came
to a pond, where he saw three Fishes caught among the reeds, and
gasping for breath. Although it is said that fishes are dumb, he
understood their complaint at perishing thus miserably. As he had a
compassionate heart, he got off his horse and put the three captives
back into the water. They wriggled in their joy, stretched up their
heads above the water, and cried--

'We will remember that you saved us, and reward you for it.'

  [Illustration: {The Fishes, in their joy, stretched up their heads
    above the water, and promised to reward him.}]

He rode on again, and after a time he seemed to hear a voice in the
sand at his feet. He listened, and heard an Ant-King complain: 'I wish
these human beings and their animals would keep out of our way. A
clumsy horse has just put his hoof down upon a number of my people in
the most heartless way.'

He turned his horse into a side path, and the Ant-King cried: 'We will
remember and reward you.'

The road now ran through a forest, and he saw a pair of Ravens
standing by their nest throwing out their young.

'Away with you, you gallows birds,' they were saying. 'We can't feed
you any longer. You are old enough to look after yourselves.'

The poor little nestlings lay on the ground, fluttering and flapping
their wings, and crying: 'We, poor helpless children, to feed
ourselves, and we can't even fly! We shall die of hunger, there is
nothing else for it.'

The good Youth dismounted, killed his horse with his sword, and left
the carcase as food for the young Ravens. They hopped along to it, and
cried: 'We will remember and reward you.'

Now he had to depend upon his own legs, and after going a long way he
came to a large town.

There was much noise and bustle in the streets, where a man on
horseback was making a proclamation.

'The King's daughter seeks a husband, but any one who wishes to sue
for her hand must accomplish a hard task; and if he does not bring it
to a successful issue, he will forfeit his life.'

Many had already attempted the task, but they had risked their lives
in vain.

When the Youth saw the Princess, he was so dazzled by her beauty that
he forgot all danger, at once sought an audience of the King, and
announced himself as a suitor.

He was immediately led out to the seashore, and a golden ring was
thrown into the water before his eyes. Then the King ordered him to
fetch it out from the depths of the sea, and added--

'If you come to land without it, you will be thrown back every time
till you perish in the waves.'

Every one pitied the handsome Youth, but they had to go and leave him
standing solitary on the seashore.

He was pondering over what he should do, when, all at once, he saw
three Fishes swimming towards him. They were no others than the very
ones whose lives he had saved.

The middle one carried a mussel-shell in its mouth, which it laid on
the sand at the feet of the Youth. When he picked it up, and opened
it, there lay the ring.

Full of joy, he took it to the King, expecting that he would give him
the promised reward.

The proud Princess, however, when she heard that he was not her equal,
despised him, and demanded that he should perform yet another task.

So she went into the garden herself, and strewed ten sacks of millet
seeds among the grass.

'He must pick up every one of those before the sun rises to-morrow
morning,' said she. 'Not a grain must be missing.'

The Youth sat miserably in the garden, wondering how it could possibly
be done. But as he could not think of a plan, he remained sadly
waiting for the dawn which would bring death to him.

But when the first sunbeams fell on the garden, he saw the ten sacks
full to the top, and not a grain was missing. The Ant-King had come in
the night with thousands and thousands of his Ants, and the grateful
creatures had picked up the millet and filled the sacks.

The Princess came into the garden herself, and saw with amazement that
the Youth had completed the task.

But still she could not control her proud heart, and she said: 'Even
if he has accomplished these two tasks, he shall not become my husband
till he brings me an apple from the tree of life.'

The Youth had no idea where to find the tree of life. However, he
started off, meaning to walk as far as his legs would carry him; but
he had no hope of finding it.

When he had travelled through three kingdoms, he was one night passing
through a great forest, and he lay down under a tree to sleep.

He heard a rustling among the branches, and a golden apple fell into
his hand. At the same time three Ravens flew down and perched on his
knee, and said:

'We are the young Ravens you saved from death. When we grew big, and
heard that you were looking for the golden apple, we flew across the
sea to the end of the world, where the tree of life stands, and
brought you the apple.'

The Youth, delighted, started on his homeward journey, and took the
golden apple to the beautiful Princess, who had now no further excuse
to offer.

They divided the apple of life, and ate it together, and then her
heart was filled with love for him, and they lived happily to a great
age.




The Wolf and the Seven Kids


There was once an old Nanny-goat who had seven Kids, and she was just
as fond of them as a mother of her children. One day she was going
into the woods to fetch some food for them, so she called them all up
to her, and said--

'My dear children, I am going out into the woods. Beware of the Wolf!
If once he gets into the house, he will eat you up, skin, and hair,
and all. The rascal often disguises himself, but you will know him by
his rough voice and his black feet.'

The Kids said, 'Oh, we will be very careful, dear mother. You may be
quite happy about us.'

Bleating tenderly, the old Goat went off to her work. Before long,
some one knocked at the door, and cried--

'Open the door, dear children! Your mother has come back and brought
something for each of you.'

But the Kids knew quite well by the voice that it was the Wolf.

'We won't open the door,' they cried. 'You are not our mother. She has
a soft gentle voice; but yours is rough, and we are quite sure that
you are the Wolf.'

So he went away to a shop and bought a lump of chalk, which he ate,
and it made his voice quite soft. He went back, knocked at the door
again, and cried--

'Open the door, dear children. Your mother has come back and brought
something for each of you.'

But the Wolf had put one of his paws on the window sill, where the
Kids saw it, and cried--

'We won't open the door. Our mother has not got a black foot as you
have; you are the Wolf.'

Then the Wolf ran to a Baker, and said, 'I have bruised my foot;
please put some dough on it.' And when the Baker had put some dough on
his foot, he ran to the Miller and said, 'Strew some flour on my
foot.'

The Miller thought, 'The old Wolf is going to take somebody in,' and
refused.

But the Wolf said, 'If you don't do it, I will eat you up.'

So the Miller was frightened, and whitened his paws. People are like
that, you know.

Now the wretch went for the third time to the door, and knocked, and
said--

'Open the door, children. Your dear mother has come home, and has
brought something for each of you out of the wood.'

The Kids cried, 'Show us your feet first, that we may be sure you are
our mother.'

He put his paws on the window sill, and when they saw that they were
white, they believed all he said, and opened the door.

Alas! It was the Wolf who walked in. They were terrified, and tried to
hide themselves. One ran under the table, the second jumped into bed,
the third into the oven, the fourth ran into the kitchen, the fifth
got into the cupboard, the sixth into the wash-tub, and the seventh
hid in the tall clock-case. But the Wolf found them all but one, and
made short work of them. He swallowed one after the other, except the
youngest one in the clock-case, whom he did not find. When he had
satisfied his appetite, he took himself off, and lay down in a meadow
outside, where he soon fell asleep.

Not long after the old Nanny-goat came back from the woods. Oh! what a
terrible sight met her eyes! The house door was wide open, table,
chairs, and benches were overturned, the washing bowl was smashed to
atoms, the covers and pillows torn from the bed. She searched all over
the house for her children, but nowhere were they to be found. She
called them by name, one by one, but no one answered. At last, when
she came to the youngest, a tiny voice cried:

'I am here, dear mother, hidden in the clock-case.'

She brought him out, and he told her that the Wolf had come and
devoured all the others.

You may imagine how she wept over her children.

At last, in her grief, she went out, and the youngest Kid ran by her
side. When they went into the meadow, there lay the Wolf under a tree,
making the branches shake with his snores. They examined him from
every side, and they could plainly see movements within his distended
body.

'Ah, heavens!' thought the Goat, 'is it possible that my poor children
whom he ate for his supper, should be still alive?'

She sent the Kid running to the house to fetch scissors, needles, and
thread. Then she cut a hole in the monster's side, and, hardly had she
begun, when a Kid popped out its head, and as soon as the hole was big
enough, all six jumped out, one after the other, all alive, and
without having suffered the least injury, for, in his greed, the
monster had swallowed them whole. You may imagine the mother's joy.
She hugged them, and skipped about like a tailor on his wedding day.
At last she said:

'Go and fetch some big stones, children, and we will fill up the
brute's body while he is asleep.'

Then the seven Kids brought a lot of stones, as fast as they could
carry them, and stuffed the Wolf with them till he could hold no more.
The old mother quickly sewed him up, without his having noticed
anything, or even moved.

At last, when the Wolf had had his sleep out, he got up, and, as the
stones made him feel very thirsty, he wanted to go to a spring to
drink. But as soon as he moved the stones began to roll about and
rattle inside him. Then he cried--

    'What's the rumbling and tumbling
    That sets my stomach grumbling?
    I thought 'twas six Kids, flesh and bones,
    Now find it's nought but rolling stones.'

  [Illustration: {The Seven Kids and their mother capered and danced
    round the spring in their joy.}]

When he reached the spring, and stooped over the water to drink, the
heavy stones dragged him down, and he was drowned miserably.

When the seven Kids saw what had happened, they came running up, and
cried aloud--'The Wolf is dead, the Wolf is dead!' and they and their
mother capered and danced round the spring in their joy.




The Queen Bee


Once upon a time two Princes started off in search of adventure, and,
falling into a wild, free mode of life, did not come home again.

The third Brother, who was called the Blockhead, set out to look for
the other two. But when at last he found them, they mocked him for
thinking of making his way in the world with his simplicity, while
they, who were so much cleverer, could not get on.

They all three went on together till they came to an ant-heap. The two
elder Princes wanted to disturb it, to see how the little ants crept
away, carrying their eggs.

But the Blockhead said: 'Leave the little creatures alone; I will not
allow you to disturb them.'

Then they went on further till they came to a lake, in which a great
many ducks were swimming about. The two wanted to catch and roast a
pair.

But the Blockhead would not allow it, and said: 'Leave the creatures
alone. You shall not kill them.'

At last they came to a bee's nest, containing such a quantity of honey
that it flowed round the trunk of the tree.

The two Princes wanted to set fire to the tree, and suffocate the
bees, so as to remove the honey.

But the Blockhead stopped them again, and said: 'Leave the creatures
alone. I will not let you burn them.'

At last the three Brothers came to a castle, where the stables were
full of stone horses, but not a soul was to be seen. They went through
all the rooms till they came to a door quite at the end, fastened with
three bolts. In the middle of the door was a lattice, through which
one could see into the room.

There they saw a little grey Man sitting at a table. They called to
him once--twice--but he did not hear them. Finally, when they had
called him the third time, he stood up and opened the door, and came
out. He said not a word, but led them to a richly-spread table, and
when they had eaten and drunk, he took them each to a bedroom.

The next morning the little grey Man came to the eldest Prince,
beckoned, and led him to a stone tablet whereon were inscribed three
tasks by means of which the castle should be freed from enchantment.

This was the first task: In the wood, under the moss, lay the
Princesses' pearls, a thousand in number. These had all to be found,
and if at sunset a single one were missing, the seeker was turned to
stone.

The eldest went away, and searched all day, but when evening came, he
had only found the first hundred, and it happened as the inscription
foretold. He was turned to stone.

The next day the second Brother undertook the quest; but he fared no
better than the first, for he only found two hundred pearls, and he
too was turned to stone.

At last came the Blockhead's turn; he searched in the moss, but the
pearls were hard to find, and he got on but slowly.

Then he sat down on a rock and cried, and as he was sitting there, the
Ant-King, whose life he had saved, came up with five thousand ants,
and it was not long before the little creatures had found all the
pearls and laid them in a heap.

Now the second task was to get the key of the Princesses' room out of
the lake.

When the Blockhead came to the lake, the ducks he had once saved, swam
up, dived, and brought up the key from the depths.

But the third task was the hardest. The Prince had to find out which
was the youngest and most charming of the Princesses while they were
asleep.

They were exactly alike, and could not be distinguished in any way,
except that before going to sleep each had eaten a different kind of
sweet. The eldest a piece of sugar, the second a little syrup, and the
third a spoonful of honey.

Then the Queen of the Bees, whom the Blockhead had saved from burning,
came and tried the lips of all three. Finally, she settled on the
mouth of the one who had eaten the honey, and so the Prince recognised
the right one.

Then the charm was broken and everything in the castle was set free,
and those who had been turned to stone took human form again.

And the Blockhead married the youngest and sweetest Princess, and
became King after her father's death, while his two Brothers married
the other sisters.

  [Illustration: The Three Sleeping Princesses.]

  [Illustration: {The Ducks, which he had once saved, dived and
    brought up the key from the depths.}]




The Elves and the Shoemaker


There was once a Shoemaker who, through no fault of his own, had
become so poor that at last he had only leather enough left for one
pair of shoes. At evening he cut out the shoes which he intended to
begin upon the next morning, and since he had a good conscience, he
lay down quietly, said his prayers, and fell asleep.

In the morning when he had said his prayers, and was preparing to sit
down to work, he found the pair of shoes standing finished on his
table. He was amazed, and could not understand it in the least.

He took the shoes in his hand to examine them more closely. They were
so neatly sewn that not a stitch was out of place, and were as good as
the work of a master-hand.

Soon after a purchaser came in, and as he was much pleased with the
shoes, he paid more than the ordinary price for them, so that the
Shoemaker was able to buy leather for two pairs of shoes with the
money.

He cut them out in the evening, and next day, with fresh courage, was
about to go to work; but he had no need to, for when he got up, the
shoes were finished, and buyers were not lacking. These gave him so
much money that he was able to buy leather for four pairs of shoes.

Early next morning he found the four pairs finished, and so it went
on; what he cut out at evening was finished in the morning, so that he
was soon again in comfortable circumstances, and became a well-to-do
man.

Now it happened one evening, not long before Christmas, when he had
cut out some shoes as usual, that he said to his Wife: 'How would it
be if we were to sit up to-night to see who it is that lends us such a
helping hand?'

The Wife agreed, lighted a candle, and they hid themselves in the
corner of the room behind the clothes which were hanging there.

At midnight came two little naked men who sat down at the Shoemaker's
table, took up the cut-out work, and began with their tiny fingers to
stitch, sew, and hammer so neatly and quickly, that the Shoemaker
could not believe his eyes. They did not stop till everything was
quite finished, and stood complete on the table; then they ran swiftly
away.

The next day the Wife said: 'The little men have made us rich, and we
ought to show our gratitude. They were running about with nothing on,
and must freeze with cold. Now I will make them little shirts, coats,
waistcoats, and hose, and will even knit them a pair of stockings, and
you shall make them each a pair of shoes.'

The Husband agreed, and at evening, when they had everything ready,
they laid out the presents on the table, and hid themselves to see how
the little men would behave.

At midnight they came skipping in, and were about to set to work; but,
instead of the leather ready cut out, they found the charming little
clothes.

At first they were surprised, then excessively delighted. With the
greatest speed they put on and smoothed down the pretty clothes,
singing:

    'Now we're boys so fine and neat,
    Why cobble more for other's feet?'

Then they hopped and danced about, and leapt over chairs and tables
and out at the door. Henceforward, they came back no more, but the
Shoemaker fared well as long as he lived, and had good luck in all his
undertakings.




The Wolf and the Man


A Fox was one day talking to a Wolf about the strength of man.

'No animals,' he said, 'could withstand man, and they were obliged to
use cunning to hold their own against him.'

The Wolf answered, 'If ever I happened to see a man, I should attack
him all the same.'

'Well, I can help you to that,' said the Fox. 'Come to me early
to-morrow, and I will show you one!'

The Wolf was early astir, and the Fox took him out to a road in the
forest, traversed daily by a Huntsman.

First came an old discharged soldier.

'Is that a Man?' asked the Wolf.

'No,' answered the Fox. 'He has been a Man.'

After that, a little boy appeared on his way to school.

'Is that a Man?'

'No; he is going to be a Man.'

At last the Huntsman made his appearance, his gun on his back, and his
hunting-knife at his side. The Fox said to the Wolf,--

'Look! There comes a Man. You may attack him, but I will make off to
my hole!'

The Wolf set on the Man, who said to himself when he saw him, 'What a
pity my gun isn't loaded with ball,' and fired a charge of shot in the
Wolf's face. The Wolf made a wry face, but he was not to be so easily
frightened, and attacked him again. Then the Huntsman gave him the
second charge. The Wolf swallowed the pain, and rushed at the
Huntsman; but he drew his bright hunting-knife, and hit out right and
left with it, so that, streaming with blood, the Wolf ran back to the
Fox.

'Well, brother Wolf,' said the Fox, 'and how did you get on with the
Man?'

'Alas!' said the Wolf. 'I never thought the strength of man would be
what it is. First, he took a stick from his shoulder, and blew into
it, and something flew into my face, which tickled frightfully. Then
he blew into it again, and it flew into my eyes and nose like
lightning and hail. Then he drew a shining rib out of his body, and
struck at me with it till I was more dead than alive.'

'Now, you see,' said the Fox, 'what a braggart you are. You throw your
hatchet so far that you can't get it back again.'




The Turnip


There were once two Brothers who both served as soldiers, and one was
rich and the other was poor.

The poor one, wishing to better himself, discarded his uniform and
worked like a Peasant. Then he dug and hoed his little field and sowed
Turnips.

The seed came up, and one of the Turnips grew to such an enormous
size, that it seemed as though it would never have finished; and it
might have been called the Queen of Turnips, for its like had never
been seen before, nor ever will be again.

At last it was so big that it filled a cart, and needed two oxen to
draw it; and the Peasant could not imagine what would come of it,
whether it would bring good luck or bad.

At last he said to himself: 'If I sell it what shall I gain? I might
eat it, but the little Turnips would do as well for that. The best
thing will be to take it to the King and offer it to him.'

So he loaded a cart, harnessed two oxen, and took it to the Court to
present it to the King.

'What is that extraordinary object?' said the King. 'I have seen many
marvels in my time, but never anything so remarkable as this. What
seed did it spring from? Perhaps it belongs to you, especially if you
are a child of good luck?'

'Oh no,' said the Peasant, 'lucky I certainly am not, for I am a poor
Soldier, who, since he could keep himself no longer, has hung up his
uniform on a nail, and tills the earth. Further, I have a Brother who
is rich, and well known to you, my Lord King; but I, because I have
nothing, am forgotten by all the world.'

Then the King pitied him and said: 'Your poverty shall be at an end,
and you shall receive such rich presents from me that your wealth will
equal that of your Brother.'

Thereupon he gave him plenty of gold, lands, fields, and flocks, and
enriched him with precious stones, so that the other Brother's wealth
could not be compared with his.

Now, when the rich Brother heard what his Brother with the single
Turnip had acquired, he envied him, and pondered how he might gain a
like treasure for himself.

  [Illustration: So the rich Brother had to put his Brother's Turnip
    into a cart, and have it taken home.]

But he wanted to show himself much cleverer, so he took gold and
horses and presented them to the King, feeling certain that he would
give him a far handsomer gift; for if his Brother got so much for a
Turnip, what would not he get for his beautiful things.

The King took the present, saying that he could give him in return
nothing rarer or better than the huge Turnip.

So the rich Brother had to put his Brother's Turnip into a cart, and
have it taken home.

Then he did not know on whom to expend his wrath and bitterness, till
evil thoughts came to him, and he determined to kill his Brother.

He hired Murderers, who were to place themselves in ambush, and then
he went to his Brother, and said: 'Dear Brother, I know of a secret
treasure which we will carry off and divide.'

The other agreed, and went without suspicion. But when they got out,
the Murderers sprang upon him, bound him, and prepared to hang him on
a tree.

While they were about it, they heard in the distance the clatter of
hoofs and the sound of singing, which frightened them so much that
they stuck their Prisoner into a sack, head foremost, slung it up on a
branch, and took to flight.

But the Man up in the sack worked a hole in it, and stuck his head
through.

Now the traveller turned out to be nothing more than a Student, a
young fellow who was riding through the wood, singing cheerily.

When the Man up in the sack saw some one down below, he called out:
'Good-day. You come in the nick of time.'

The Student looked all round, but could not make out where the voice
came from.

At last he said: 'Who calls?'

A voice from above answered: 'Raise your eyes, I am sitting up here in
the Sack of Wisdom, and in a short time I have learnt so much that the
wisdom of the schools is as air compared to mine. Soon I shall be
quite perfect, and shall come down and be the wisest of all mankind. I
understand the stars and signs of the heavens, the blowing of the
winds, the sand of the sea, the healing of sickness, the power of
herbs, birds, and stones. If you were once inside, you would feel what
wonders flow from the Sack of Knowledge.'

When the Student heard this he was astonished, and said: 'Blessed be
the hour when I met you, if only I too might get into the sack for a
little.'

The other answered, as though unwillingly: 'I will let you in for a
little while for payment and kind words, but you must wait an hour, as
there is something rather difficult which I must learn first.'

But when the Student had waited a little, he grew impatient and
entreated permission to get in, so great was his thirst for knowledge.
Then the Man in the sack pretended to give in, and said: 'In order
that I may get out of the sack you must let it down, then you can get
in.'

So the Student let it down, undid the sack and released the Prisoner,
and said: 'Now pull me up as fast as possible'; and he tried to get
into the sack and stand upright in it.

'Stop,' said the other. 'That won't do.' And he packed him in head
first, tied it up, and slung up the Disciple of Wisdom, dangling him
in the air, and said: 'How are you, my dear fellow? You will soon feel
wisdom coming upon you, and will have a most interesting experience.
Sit still till you are wiser.'

Thereupon he mounted the Student's horse, and rode off, but sent some
one in an hour to let him down again.




Clever Hans


'Where are you going, Hans?' asked his Mother.

'To see Grettel,' answered Hans.

'Behave well, Hans!'

'All right, Mother. Good-bye.'

'Good-bye, Hans.'

Hans comes to Grettel.

'Good morning, Grettel.'

'Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me?'

'I've not brought you anything. I want a present.'

Grettel gives him a needle. Hans takes the needle, and sticks it in a
load of hay, and walks home behind the cart.

'Good evening, Mother.'

'Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?'

'I've been to Grettel's.'

'What did you give her?'

'I gave her nothing. But she made me a present.'

'What did she give you?'

'She gave me a needle.'

'What did you do with it?'

'Stuck it in the hay-cart.'

'That was stupid, Hans. You should have stuck it in your sleeve.'

'Never mind, Mother; I'll do better next time.'

'Where are you going, Hans?'

'To see Grettel, Mother.'

'Behave well.'

'All right, Mother. Good-bye.'

'Good-bye, Hans.'

Hans comes to Grettel.

'Good morning, Grettel.'

'Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me?'

'I've brought nothing. But I want something.'

Grettel gives him a knife.

'Good-bye, Grettel.'

'Good-bye, Hans.'

Hans takes the knife, and sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home.

'Good evening, Mother.'

'Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?'

'Been to see Grettel.'

'What did you give her?'

'I gave her nothing. But she gave me something.'

'What did she give you?'

'She gave me a knife.'

'Where is the knife, Hans?'

'I stuck it in my sleeve.'

'That's a stupid place, Hans. You should have put it in your pocket.'

'Never mind, Mother; I'll do better next time.'

'Where are you going, Hans?'

'To see Grettel, Mother.'

'Behave well, then.'

'All right, Mother. Good-bye.'

'Good-bye, Hans.'

Hans comes to Grettel.

'Good morning, Grettel.'

'Good morning, Hans. Have you brought me anything nice?'

'I've brought nothing. What have you got for me?'

Grettel gives him a young kid.

'Good-bye, Grettel.'

'Good-bye, Hans.'

Hans takes the kid, ties its legs together, and puts it in his pocket.

When he got home, it was suffocated.

'Good evening, Mother.'

'Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?'

'Been to see Grettel, Mother.'

'What did you give her?'

'I gave her nothing. But I brought away something.'

'What did Grettel give you?'

'She gave me a young kid.'

'What did you do with the kid?'

'Put it in my pocket, Mother.'

'That was very stupid. You should have led it by a rope.'

'Never mind, Mother; I'll manage better next time.'

'Where are you going, Hans?'

'To see Grettel, Mother.'

'Manage well, then.'

'All right, Mother. Good-bye.'

'Good-bye, Hans.'

Hans comes to Grettel.

'Good morning, Grettel.'

'Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me?'

'I've brought you nothing. What have you got for me?'

Grettel gives him a piece of bacon.

'Good-bye, Grettel.'

'Good-bye, Hans.'

Hans takes the bacon, ties a rope round it, and drags it along behind
him. The dogs come after him, and eat it up. When he got home he had
the rope in his hand, but there was nothing at the end of it.

'Good evening, Mother.'

'Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?'

'To see Grettel, Mother.'

'What did you take her?'

'I took nothing. But I brought something away.'

'What did she give you?'

'She gave me a piece of bacon.'

'What did you do with the bacon, Hans?'

'I tied it to a rope, and dragged it home. But the dogs ate it.'

'That was a stupid business, Hans. You should have carried it on your
head.'

'Never mind, Mother; I'll do better next time.'

'Where are you going, Hans?'

'To see Grettel, Mother.'

'Behave properly, then.'

'All right, Mother. Good-bye.'

'Good-bye, Hans.'

Hans comes to Grettel.

'Good morning, Grettel.'

'Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me?'

'I've brought nothing. What have you got for me?'

Grettel gives Hans a calf.

'Good-bye, Grettel.'

'Good-bye, Hans.'

Hans takes the calf, and puts it on his head. It kicks his face.

'Good evening, Mother.'

'Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?'

'Been to see Grettel, Mother.'

'What did you take her?'

'I took her nothing, Mother. She gave me something.'

'What did she give you, Hans?'

'She gave me a calf, Mother.'

'What did you do with the calf?'

'Put it on my head, Mother, and it kicked my face.'

'That was very stupid, Hans. You should have led it by a rope, and put
it in the cow-stall.'

'Never mind, Mother; I'll do better next time.'

'Where are you going, Hans?'

'To see Grettel, Mother.'

'Mind how you behave, Hans.'

'All right, Mother. Good-bye.'

Hans goes to Grettel.

  [Illustration: When he got home he had the rope in his hand, but
    there was nothing at the end of it.]

'Good morning, Grettel.'

'Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me?'

'I've brought you nothing. I want to take away something.'

'I'll go with you myself, Hans.'

Hans ties Grettel to a rope, and leads her home, where he puts her in
a stall, and ties her up. Then he goes into the house to his Mother.

'Good evening, Mother.'

'Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?'

'To see Grettel, Mother.'

'What did you take her?'

'I took nothing.'

'What did Grettel give you?'

'She gave me nothing. She came with me.'

'Where did you leave Grettel?'

'Tied up in the stable with a rope.'

'That was stupid. You should have cast sheep's eyes at her.'

'Never mind; I'll do better next time.'

Hans went into the stable, plucked the eyes out of the cows and
calves, and threw them in Grettel's face.

Grettel got angry, broke the rope, and ran away.

Yet she became Hans' wife.




The Three Languages


There once lived in Switzerland an old Count, who had an only son; but
he was very stupid, and could learn nothing. So his father said to
him: 'Listen to me, my son. I can get nothing into your head, try as
hard as I may. You must go away from here, and I will hand you over to
a renowned Professor for a whole year.' At the end of the year he came
home again, and his father asked: 'Now, my son, what have you learnt?'

'Father, I have learnt the language of dogs.'

'Mercy on us!' cried his father, 'is that all you have learnt? I will
send you away again to another Professor in a different town.' The
youth was taken there, and remained with this Professor also for
another year. When he came back his father asked him again: 'My son,
what have you learnt?'

He answered: 'I have learnt bird language.'

Then the father flew into a rage, and said: 'Oh, you hopeless
creature, have you been spending all this precious time and learnt
nothing? Aren't you ashamed to come into my presence? I will send you
to a third Professor, but if you learn nothing this time, I won't be
your father any longer.'

The son stopped with the third Professor in the same way for a whole
year, and when he came home again and his father asked, 'My son, what
have you learnt?' he answered--

'My dear father, this year I have learnt frog language.'

Thereupon his father flew into a fearful passion, and said: 'This
creature is my son no longer. I turn him out of the house and command
you to lead him into the forest and take his life.'

  [Illustration: On the way he passed a swamp, in which a number of
    Frogs were croaking.]

They led him forth, but when they were about to kill him, for pity's
sake they could not do it, and let him go. Then they cut out the
eyes and tongue of a Fawn, in order that they might take back proofs
to the old Count.

The youth wandered about, and at length came to a castle, where he
begged a night's lodging.

'Very well,' said the Lord of the castle. 'If you like to pass the
night down there in the old tower, you may; but I warn you that it
will be at the risk of your life, for it is full of savage dogs. They
bark and howl without ceasing, and at certain hours they must have a
man thrown to them, and they devour him at once.'

The whole neighbourhood was distressed by the scourge, but no one
could do anything to remedy it. But the youth was not a bit afraid,
and said: 'Just let me go down to these barking dogs, and give me
something that I can throw to them; they won't do me any harm.'

As he would not have anything else, they gave him some food for the
savage dogs, and took him down to the tower.

The dogs did not bark at him when he entered, but ran round him
wagging their tails in a most friendly manner, ate the food he gave
them, and did not so much as touch a hair of his head.

The next morning, to the surprise of every one, he made his appearance
again, and said to the Lord of the castle, 'The Dogs have revealed to
me in their own language why they live there and bring mischief to the
country. They are enchanted, and obliged to guard a great treasure
which is hidden under the tower, and will get no rest till it has been
dug up; and how that has to be done I have also learnt from them.'

Every one who heard this was delighted, and the Lord of the castle
said he would adopt him as a son if he accomplished the task
successfully. He went down to the tower again, and as he knew how to
set to work he accomplished his task, and brought out a chest full of
gold. The howling of the savage Dogs was from that time forward heard
no more. They entirely disappeared, and the country was delivered from
the scourge.

After a time, he took it into his head to go to Rome. On the way he
passed a swamp, in which a number of Frogs were croaking. He listened,
and when he heard what they were saying he became quite pensive and
sad.

At last he reached Rome, at a moment when the Pope had just died, and
there was great doubt among the Cardinals whom they ought to name as
his successor. They agreed at last that the man to whom some divine
miracle should be manifested ought to be chosen as Pope. Just as they
had come to this decision, the young Count entered the church, and
suddenly two snow-white doves flew down and alighted on his shoulders.

The clergy recognised in this the sign from Heaven, and asked him on
the spot whether he would be Pope.

He was undecided, and knew not whether he was worthy of the post; but
the Doves told him that he might accept, and at last he said 'Yes.'

Thereupon he was anointed and consecrated, and so was fulfilled what
he had heard from the Frogs on the way, which had disturbed him so
much--namely, that he should become Pope.

Then he had to chant mass, and did not know one word of it. But the
two Doves sat upon his shoulders and whispered it to him.




The Fox and the Cat


It happened once that the Cat met Mr. Fox in the wood, and because she
thought: 'He is clever and experienced in all the ways of the world,'
she addressed him in a friendly manner.

'Good morning, dear Mr. Fox! how are you and how do you get along in
these hard times?'

The Fox, full of pride, looked at the Cat from head to foot for some
time hardly knowing whether he would deign to answer or not. At last
he said--

'Oh, you poor whisker-wiper, you piebald fool, you starveling
mouse-hunter! what has come into your head? How dare you ask me how I
am getting on? What sort of education have you had? How many arts are
you master of?'

  [Illustration: The Cat crept stealthily up to the topmost branch.]

'Only one,' said the Cat, meekly.

'And what might that one be?' asked the Fox.

'When the hounds run after me, I can jump into a tree and save
myself.'

'Is that all?' said the Fox. 'I am master of a hundred arts, and I
have a sack full of cunning tricks in addition. But I pity you. Come
with me, and I will teach you how to escape the hounds.'

Just then, a huntsman came along with four hounds. The Cat sprang
trembling into a tree, and crept stealthily up to the topmost branch,
where she was entirely hidden by twigs and leaves.

'Open your sack, Mr. Fox! open your sack!' cried the Cat; but the
hounds had gripped him, and held him fast.

'O Mr. Fox!' cried the Cat, 'you with your hundred arts, and your sack
full of tricks, are caught, while I, with my one, am safe. Had you
been able to climb up here, you would not have lost your life.'




  [Illustration: {So the four Brothers took their sticks in their
    hands, bade their Father good-bye, and passed out of the town
    gate.}]

The Four Clever Brothers


There was once a poor man who had four sons, and when they were grown
up, he said to them: 'Dear children, you must go out into the world
now, for I have nothing to give you. You must each learn a trade and
make your own way in the world.'

So the four Brothers took their sticks in their hands, bid their
father good-bye, and passed out of the town gate.

When they had walked some distance, they came to four cross roads,
which led into four different districts. Then the eldest one said: 'We
must part here, but this day four years, we will meet here again,
having in the meantime done our best to make our fortunes.'

Then each one went his own way. The eldest met an old man, who asked
him where he came from, and what he was going to do.

'I want to learn a trade,' he answered.

Then the Man said: 'Come with me and learn to be a Thief.'

'No,' answered he, 'that is no longer considered an honest trade; and
the end of that song would be that I should swing as the clapper in a
bell.'

'Oh,' said the Man, 'you need not be afraid of the gallows. I will
only teach you how to take things no one else wants, or knows how to
get hold of, and where no one can find you out.'

So he allowed himself to be persuaded, and under the Man's
instructions he became such an expert thief that nothing was safe from
him which he had once made up his mind to have.

The second Brother met a Man who put the same question to him, as to
what he was going to do in the world.

'I don't know yet,' he answered.

'Then come with me and be a Star-gazer. It is the grandest thing in
the world, nothing is hidden from you.'

He was pleased with the idea, and became such a clever Star-gazer,
that when he had learnt everything and wanted to go away, his master
gave him a telescope, and said--

'With this you can see everything that happens in the sky and on
earth, and nothing can remain hidden from you.'

The third Brother was taken in hand by a Huntsman, who taught him
everything connected with sport so well, that he became a first-rate
Huntsman.

On his departure his master presented him with a gun, and said: 'This
gun will never miss: whatever you aim at you will hit without fail.'

The youngest Brother also met a Man who asked him what he was going to
do.

'Wouldn't you like to be a Tailor?' he asked.

'I don't know about that,' said the young man. 'I don't much fancy
sitting cross-legged from morning till night, and everlastingly
pulling a needle in and out, and pushing a flat iron.'

'Dear, dear!' said the Man, 'what are you talking about? If you come
to me you will learn quite a different sort of tailoring. It is a most
pleasant and agreeable trade, not to say most honourable.'

So he allowed himself to be talked over, and went with the Man, who
taught him his trade thoroughly.

On his departure, he gave him a needle, and said: 'With this needle
you will be able to stitch anything together, be it as soft as an egg,
or as hard as steel; and it will become like a whole piece of stuff
with no seam visible.'

When the four years, which the Brothers had agreed upon, had passed,
they met at the cross-roads. They embraced one another and hurried
home to their Father.

'Well!' said he, quite pleased to see them, 'has the wind wafted you
back to me again?'

They told him all that had happened to them, and that each had
mastered a trade. They were sitting in front of the house under a big
tree, and their Father said--

'Now, I will put you to the test, and see what you can do.'

Then he looked up and said to his second son--

'There is a chaffinch's nest in the topmost branch of this tree; tell
me how many eggs there are in it?'

The Star-gazer took his glass and said: 'There are five.'

His Father said to the eldest: 'Bring the eggs down without disturbing
the bird sitting on them.'

The cunning Thief climbed up and took the five eggs from under the
bird so cleverly that it never noticed they were gone, and he gave
them to his Father. His Father took them, and put them one on each
corner of the table, and one in the middle, and said to the
Sportsman--

'You must shoot the five eggs through the middle at one shot.'

The Sportsman levelled his gun, and divided each egg in half at one
shot, as his Father desired. He certainly must have had some of the
powder which shoots round the corner.

'Now it is your turn,' said his Father to the fourth son. 'You will
sew the eggs together again, the shells and the young birds inside
them; and you will do it in such a manner that they will be none the
worse for the shot.'

The Tailor produced his needle, and stitched away as his Father
ordered. When he had finished, the Thief had to climb up the tree
again, and put the eggs back under the bird without her noticing it.
The bird spread herself over the eggs, and a few days later the
fledglings crept out of the shell, and they all had a red line round
their throats where the Tailor had sewn them together.

'Yes,' said the old man to his sons; 'I can certainly praise your
skill. You have learnt something worth knowing, and made the most of
your time. I don't know which of you to give the palm to. I only hope
you may soon have a chance of showing your skill so that it may be
settled.'

Not long after this there was a great alarm raised in the country:
the King's only daughter had been carried off by a Dragon. The King
sorrowed for her day and night, and proclaimed that whoever brought
her back should marry her.

The four Brothers said to one another: 'This would be an opportunity
for us to prove what we can do.' And they decided to go out together
to deliver the Princess.

'I shall soon know where she is,' said the Star-gazer, as he looked
through his telescope; and then he said--

'I see her already. She is a long way from here, she is sitting on a
rock in the middle of the sea, and the Dragon is near, watching her.'

Then he went to the King and asked for a ship for himself and his
Brothers to cross the sea in search of the rock.

They found the Princess still on the rock, but the Dragon was asleep
with his head on her lap.

The Sportsman said: 'I dare not shoot. I should kill the beautiful
maiden.'

'Then I will try my luck,' said the Thief, and he stole her away from
beneath the Dragon. He did it so gently and skilfully, that the
monster never discovered it, but went snoring on.

Full of joy, they hurried away with her to the ship, and steered for
the open sea. But the Dragon on waking had missed the Princess, and
now came after them through the air, foaming with rage.

Just as he was hovering over the ship and about to drop on them, the
Sportsman took aim with his gun and shot him through the heart. The
monster fell down dead, but he was so huge, that in falling, he
dragged the whole ship down with him. They managed to seize a few
boards, on which they kept themselves afloat.

  [Illustration: {The King's only daughter had been carried off
    by a Dragon.}]

They were now in great straits, but the Tailor, not to be outdone,
produced his wonderful needle, and put some great stitches into the
boards, seated himself on them, and collected all the floating bits of
the ship. Then he stitched them all together so cleverly, that in
a very short time the ship was seaworthy again, and they sailed
happily home.

  [Illustration: They found the Princess still on the rock, but the
    Dragon was asleep with his head on her lap.]

The King was overjoyed when he saw his daughter again, and he said to
the four Brothers: 'One of you shall marry her, but which one, you
must decide among yourselves.'

An excited discussion then took place among them, for each one made a
claim.

The Star-gazer said: 'Had I not discovered the Princess, all your arts
would have been in vain, therefore she is mine!'

The Thief said: 'What would have been the good of discovering her if I
had not taken her from under the Dragon? So she is mine.'

The Sportsman said: 'You, as well as the Princess, would have been
destroyed by the monster if my shot had not hit him. So she is mine.'

The Tailor said: 'And if I had not sewn the ship together with my
skill, you would all have been drowned miserably. Therefore she is
mine.'

The King said: 'Each of you has an equal right; but, as you can't all
have her, none of you shall have her. I will give every one of you
half a kingdom as a reward.'

The Brothers were quite satisfied with this decision, and they said:
'It is better so than that we should quarrel over it.'

So each of them received half a kingdom, and they lived happily with
their Father for the rest of their days.




The Lady and the Lion


There was once a Man who had to take a long journey, and when he was
saying good-bye to his daughters he asked what he should bring back to
them.

The eldest wanted pearls, the second diamonds, but the third said,
'Dear father, I should like a singing, soaring lark.'

The father said, 'Very well, if I can manage it, you shall have it';
and he kissed all three and set off. He bought pearls and diamonds for
the two eldest, but he had searched everywhere in vain for the
singing, soaring lark, and this worried him, for his youngest daughter
was his favourite child.

Once his way led through a wood, in the midst of which was a splendid
castle; near it stood a tree, and right up at the top he saw a lark
singing and soaring. 'Ah,' he said, 'I have come across you in the
nick of time'; and he called to his Servant to dismount and catch the
little creature. But as he approached the tree a Lion sprang out from
underneath, and shook himself, and roared so that the leaves on the
tree trembled.

'Who dares to steal my lark?' said he. 'I will eat up the thief!'

Then the Man said, 'I didn't know that the bird was yours. I will make
up for my fault by paying a heavy ransom. Only spare my life.'

But the Lion said, 'Nothing can save you, unless you promise to give
me whatever first meets you when you get home. If you consent, I will
give you your life and the bird into the bargain.'

But the Man hesitated, and said, 'Suppose my youngest and favourite
daughter were to come running to meet me when I go home!'

But the Servant was afraid, and said, 'Your daughter will not
necessarily be the first to come to meet you; it might just as well be
a cat or a dog.'

So the Man let himself be persuaded, took the lark, and promised to
the Lion for his own whatever first met him on his return home. When
he reached home, and entered his house, the first person who met him
was none other than his youngest daughter; she came running up and
kissed and caressed him, and when she saw that he had brought the
singing, soaring lark, she was beside herself with joy. But her father
could not rejoice; he began to cry, and said, 'My dear child, it has
cost me dear, for I have had to promise you to a Lion who will tear
you in pieces when he has you in his power.' And he told her all that
had happened, and begged her not to go, come what might.

But she consoled him, saying, 'Dear father, what you have promised
must be performed. I will go and will soon soften the Lion's heart, so
that I shall come back safe and sound.' The next morning the way was
shown to her, and she said good-bye and went confidently into the
forest.

Now the Lion was an enchanted Prince, who was a Lion by day, and all
his followers were Lions too; but by night they reassumed their human
form. On her arrival she was kindly received, and conducted to the
castle. When night fell, the Lion turned into a handsome man, and
their wedding was celebrated with due magnificence. And they lived
happily together, sitting up at night and sleeping by day. One day he
came to her and said, 'To-morrow there is a festival at your father's
house to celebrate your eldest sister's wedding; if you would like to
go my Lions shall escort you.'

She answered that she was very eager to see her father again, so she
went away accompanied by the Lions.

There was great rejoicing on her coming, for they all thought that she
had been torn to pieces and had long been dead.

  [Illustration: {She went away accompanied by the Lions.}]

But she told them what a handsome husband she had and how well she
fared; and she stayed with them as long as the wedding festivities
lasted. Then she went back again into the wood.

When the second daughter married, and the youngest was again invited
to the wedding, she said to the Lion, 'This time I will not go alone,
you must come too.'

But the Lion said it would be too dangerous, for if a gleam of light
touched him he would be changed into a Dove and would have to fly
about for seven years.

'Ah,' said she, 'only go with me, and I will protect you and keep off
every ray of light.'

So they went away together, and took their little child with them too.
They had a hall built with such thick walls that no ray could
penetrate, and thither the Lion was to retire when the wedding torches
were kindled. But the door was made of fresh wood which split and
caused a little crack which no one noticed.

Now the wedding was celebrated with great splendour. But when the
procession came back from church with a large number of torches and
lights, a ray of light no broader than a hair fell upon the Prince,
and the minute this ray touched him he was changed; and when his wife
came in and looked for him, she saw nothing but a White Dove sitting
there. The Dove said to her, 'For seven years I must fly about the
world; every seventh step I will let fall a drop of blood and a white
feather which will show you the way, and if you will follow the track
you can free me.'

Thereupon the Dove flew out of the door, and she followed it, and
every seventh step it let fall a drop of blood and a little white
feather to show her the way. So she wandered about the world, and
never rested till the seven years were nearly passed. Then she
rejoiced, thinking that she would soon be free of her troubles; but
she was still far from release. One day as they were journeying on in
the accustomed way, the feather and the drop of blood ceased falling,
and when she looked up the Dove had vanished.

'Man cannot help me,' she thought. So she climbed up to the Sun and
said to it, 'You shine upon all the valleys and mountain peaks, have
you not seen a White Dove flying by?'

'No,' said the Sun, 'I have not seen one; but I will give you a little
casket. Open it when you are in dire need.'

She thanked the Sun, and went on till night, when the Moon shone out.
'You shine all night,' she said, 'over field and forest, have you seen
a White Dove flying by?'

'No,' answered the Moon, 'I have seen none; but here is an egg. Break
it when you are in great need.'

She thanked the Moon, and went on till the Night Wind blew upon her.
'You blow among all the trees and leaves, have not you seen a White
Dove?' she asked.

'No,' said the Night Wind, 'I have not seen one; but I will ask the
other three Winds, who may, perhaps, have seen it.'

The East Wind and the West Wind came, but they had seen no Dove. Only
the South Wind said, 'I have seen the White Dove. It has flown away to
the Red Sea, where it has again become a Lion, since the seven years
are over; and the Lion is ever fighting with a Dragon who is an
enchanted Princess.'

Then the Night Wind said, 'I will advise you. Go to the Red Sea, you
will find tall reeds growing on the right bank; count them, and cut
down the eleventh, strike the Dragon with it and then the Lion will be
able to master it, and both will regain human shape. Next, look round,
and you will see the winged Griffin, who dwells by the Red Sea, leap
upon its back with your beloved, and it will carry you across the sea.
Here is a nut. Drop it when you come to mid-ocean; it will open
immediately and a tall nut-tree will grow up out of the water, on
which the Griffin will settle. Could it not rest, it would not be
strong enough to carry you across, and if you forget to drop the nut,
it will let you fall into the sea.'

Then she journeyed on, and found everything as the Night Wind had
said. She counted the reeds by the sea and cut off the eleventh,
struck the Dragon with it, and the Lion mastered it; immediately both
regained human form. But when the Princess who had been a Dragon was
free from enchantment, she took the Prince in her arms, seated herself
on the Griffin's back, and carried him off. And the poor wanderer,
again forsaken, sat down and cried. At last she took courage and said
to herself: 'Wherever the winds blow, I will go, and as long as cocks
crow, I will search till I find him.'

So she went on a long, long way, till she came to the castle where the
Prince and Princess were living. There she heard that there was to be
a festival to celebrate their wedding. Then she said to herself,
'Heaven help me,' and she opened the casket which the Sun had given
her; inside it was a dress, as brilliant as the Sun itself. She took
it out, put it on, and went into the castle, where every one,
including the Bride, looked at her with amazement. The dress pleased
the Bride so much that she asked if it was to be bought.

'Not with gold or goods,' she answered; 'but with flesh and blood.'

The Bride asked what she meant, and she answered, 'Let me speak with
the Bridegroom in his chamber to-night.'

The Bride refused. However, she wanted the dress so much that at last
she consented; but the Chamberlain was ordered to give the Prince a
sleeping draught.

At night, when the Prince was asleep, she was taken to his room. She
sat down and said: 'For seven years I have followed you. I have been
to the Sun, and the Moon, and the Four Winds to look for you. I have
helped you against the Dragon, and will you now quite forget me?'

But the Prince slept so soundly that he thought it was only the
rustling of the wind among the pine-trees. When morning came she was
taken away, and had to give up the dress; and as it had not helped her
she was very sad, and went out into a meadow and cried. As she was
sitting there, she remembered the egg which the Moon had given her;
she broke it open, and out came a hen and twelve chickens, all of
gold, who ran about chirping, and then crept back under their mother's
wings. A prettier sight could not be seen. She got up and drove them
about the meadow, till the Bride saw them from the window. The
chickens pleased her so much that she asked if they were for sale.
'Not for gold and goods, but for flesh and blood. Let me speak with
the Bridegroom in his chamber once more.'

The Bride said 'Yes,' intending to deceive her as before; but when the
Prince went to his room he asked the Chamberlain what all the
murmuring and rustling in the night meant. Then the Chamberlain told
him how he had been ordered to give him a sleeping draught because a
poor girl had been concealed in his room, and that night he was to do
the same again. 'Pour out the drink, and put it near my bed,' said the
Prince. At night she was brought in again, and when she began to
relate her sad fortunes he recognised the voice of his dear wife,
sprang up, and said, 'Now I am really free for the first time. All has
been as a dream, for the foreign Princess cast a spell over me so that
I was forced to forget you; but heaven in a happy hour has taken away
my blindness.'

Then they both stole out of the castle, for they feared the Princess's
father, because he was a sorcerer. They mounted the Griffin, who bore
them over the Red Sea, and when they got to mid-ocean, she dropped the
nut. On the spot a fine nut-tree sprang up, on which the bird rested;
then it took them home, where they found their child grown tall and
beautiful, and they lived happily till the end.




  [Illustration: {The poor Horse was very sad, and went into the
    forest to get a little shelter from the wind and weather.}]

The Fox and the Horse


A peasant once had a faithful Horse, but it had grown old and could no
longer do its work. Its master grudged it food, and said: 'I can't use
you any more, but I still feel kindly towards you, and if you show
yourself strong enough to bring me a Lion I will keep you to the end
of your days. But away with you now, out of my stable'; and he drove
it out into the open country.

The poor Horse was very sad, and went into the forest to get a little
shelter from the wind and weather. There he met a Fox, who said: 'Why
do you hang your head, and wander about in this solitary fashion?'

'Alas!' answered the Horse, 'avarice and honesty cannot live together.
My master has forgotten all the service I have done him for these many
years, and because I can no longer plough he will no longer feed me,
and he has driven me away.'

'Without any consideration?' asked the Fox.

'Only the poor consolation of telling me that if I was strong enough
to bring him a Lion he would keep me, but he knows well enough that
the task is beyond me.'

The Fox said: 'But I will help you. Just you lie down here, and
stretch your legs out as if you were dead.' The Horse did as he was
told, and the Fox went to the Lion's den, not far off, and said:
'There is a dead Horse out there. Come along with me, and you will
have a rare meal.' The Lion went with him, and when they got up to the
Horse, the Fox said: 'You can't eat it in comfort here. I'll tell you
what. I will tie it to you, and you can drag it away to your den, and
enjoy it at your leisure.'

The plan pleased the Lion, and he stood quite still, close to the
Horse, so that the Fox should fasten them together. But the Fox tied
the Lion's legs together with the Horse's tail, and twisted and
knotted it so that it would be quite impossible for it to come undone.

When he had finished his work he patted the Horse on the shoulder, and
said: 'Pull, old Grey! Pull!'

Then the Horse sprang up, and dragged the Lion away behind him. The
Lion in his rage roared, so that all the birds in the forest were
terrified, and flew away. But the Horse let him roar, and never
stopped till he stood before his master's door.

When the master saw him he was delighted, and said to him: 'You shall
stay with me, and have a good time as long as you live.'

And he fed him well till he died.

  [Illustration: Then the Horse sprang up, and dragged the Lion away
    behind him.]




The Blue Light


There was once a Soldier who had served his King well and faithfully
for many years. But, on account of his many wounds, he could serve no
longer.

The King said: 'You can go home now. I have no further need for you. I
can only pay those who serve me.'

The Soldier did not know what to do for a living, and he went sadly
away.

He walked all day, till he reached a wood, where, in the distance, he
saw a light. On approaching it, he found a house inhabited by a Witch.

'Pray give me shelter for the night, and something to eat and drink,'
he said, 'or I shall perish.'

'Oh ho!' she said. 'Who gives anything to a runaway Soldier, I should
like to know. But I will be merciful and take you in, if you will do
something for me.'

'What is it?' asked the Soldier.

'I want you to dig up my garden to-morrow.'

The Soldier agreed to this, and next day he worked as hard as he
could, but he could not finish before evening.

'I see,' said the Witch, 'that you can do no more this evening. I will
keep you one night more, and to-morrow you shall split up some logs
for firewood.'

The Soldier took the whole day over this task, and in the evening the
Witch proposed that he should again stay another night.

'You shall only have a very light task to-morrow,' she said. 'There is
an old, dry well behind my house. My light, which burns blue, and
never goes out, has fallen into it, and I want you to bring it back.'

Next day the Witch led him to the well, and let him down in a basket.

He found the light, and made a sign to be pulled up; but when he was
near the top, the Witch put out her hand, and wanted to take it from
him.

But he, seeing her evil designs, said: 'No; I will not give you the
light till I have both feet safe on dry land again.'

The Witch flew into a passion, let him fall back into the well again,
and went away.

The poor Soldier fell on to the damp ground without taking any harm,
and the Blue Light burnt as brightly as ever. But what was the good of
that? He saw that he could not escape death.

He sat for some time feeling very sad, then happening to put his hand
into his pocket, he found his pipe still half full.

'This will be my last pleasure,' he thought, as he lighted it at the
Blue Light, and began to smoke.

When the cloud of smoke he made cleared off a little, a tiny black Man
appeared before him, and asked: 'What orders, Master?'

'What do you mean?' the Soldier asked in amazement.

'I must do anything that you command,' said the Little Man.

'Oh, if that is so,' said the Soldier, 'get me out of this well
first.'

The Little Man took him by the hand, and led him through an
underground passage; but the Soldier did not forget to take the Blue
Light with him.

On the way he showed the Soldier all the treasures the Witch had
amassed there, and he took as much gold as he could carry.

When they reached the top he said to the Little Man: 'Now go, bind the
Witch and take her before the Judge.'

Before long she came by riding at a furious pace on a tom cat, and
screaming at the top of her voice.

The Little Man soon after appeared, and said: 'Everything is done as
you commanded, and the Witch hangs on the gallows. What further orders
have you, Master?'

'Nothing at this moment,' answered the Soldier. 'You can go home; only
be at hand when I call.'

'You only have to light your pipe at the Blue Light, and I will be
there,' said the Little Man, and then he vanished.

The Soldier went back to the town that he had left, and ordered some
new clothes, then he went to the best inn and told the landlord to
give him the best rooms.

  [Illustration: Before long the Witch came by riding at a furious
    pace on a tom cat.]

When he had taken possession, he summoned the little black Man, and
said: 'I served my King faithfully, but he sent me away to die of
hunger. Now I will have my revenge.'

'What do you wish me to do?' asked the Little Man.

'Late at night, when the Princess is asleep in her bed, bring her,
sleeping, to me, and I will make her do menial service for me.'

'It is an easy enough thing for me to do,' said the Little Man. 'But
it will be a bad business for you if it comes out.'

As the clock struck twelve, the door sprang open, and the Little Man
bore the Maiden in.

'Ah ha! There you are!' cried the Soldier. 'Set about your work at
once. Fetch the broom and sweep the floor.'

When she had finished, he sat down and ordered her to take his boots
off. Then he threw them at her, and made her pick them up and clean
them. She did everything he ordered without resistance, silently, and
with half-shut eyes.

At the first cock-crow, the Little Man carried her away to the royal
palace, and put her back in bed.

In the morning when the Princess got up, she went to her Father, and
told him that she had had an extraordinary dream.

'I was carried through the streets at lightning speed, and taken to
the room of a Soldier, whom I had to serve as a maid, and do all kinds
of menial work. I had to sweep the room, and clean his boots. Of
course, it was only a dream, and yet I am as tired this morning as if
I had done it all.'

'The dream could not have been true,' said the King. 'But I will give
you a piece of advice. Fill your pocket with peas, and cut a little
hole in it, then if you are carried away again, they will drop out and
leave a track on the road.'

When the King said this, the Little Man was standing by, invisible,
and heard it all.

At night, when he again carried off the Princess, the peas certainly
fell out of her pocket, but they were useless to trace her by, for the
cunning Little Man had scattered peas all over the streets. Again the
Princess had to perform her menial duties till cock-crow.

The next morning the King sent out people who were to find the track;
but they were unable to do so, because in every street the poor
children were picking up peas, and saying: 'It must have rained peas
in the night.'

'We must devise a better plan,' said the King. 'Keep your shoes on
when you go to bed, and before you come away from the place where you
are taken, hide one of them. I shall be sure to find it.'

The Little Man heard this plan also; and when the Soldier told him to
bring the Princess again, he advised him to put it off. He said he
knew no further means against their craftiness; and if the shoe were
found, it would be very dangerous for his master.

'Do what I tell you,' answered the Soldier; and for the third time the
Princess was brought and made to work like a servant. But before
leaving she hid one of her shoes under the bed.

Next morning the King ordered the whole town to be searched for his
Daughter's shoe, and it was soon found in the Soldier's room. He
himself, at the request of the Little Man, had gone outside the gates;
but before long he was seized and thrown into prison.

In his flight he had forgotten his greatest treasures, the Blue Light
and his gold. He had but one ducat in his pocket.

As he stood at his window in the prison, loaded with chains, he saw
one of his comrades going by. He tapped on the pane, and said:

'Be so good as to fetch me the little bundle I left behind at the inn,
and I will give you a ducat.'

His comrade hurried off and brought him the bundle. As soon as the
Soldier was alone, he lighted his pipe and summoned the Little Man.

'Don't be afraid,' he said to his Master. 'Go where they take you, and
let what will happen, only take the Blue Light with you.'

Next day a trial was held, and although the Soldier had done no harm,
the Judge sentenced him to death.

When he was led out to execution he asked a last favour of the King.

'What is your wish?' asked the King.

'That I may smoke a last pipe.'

'You may smoke three,' answered the King. 'But don't imagine that I
will therefore grant you your life.'

Then the Soldier drew out his pipe, and lighted it at the Blue Light.

As soon as a few rings of smoke arose, the Little Man appeared with a
little cudgel in his hand, and said: 'What is my Master's command?'

'Strike the false Judge and his minions to the ground, and do not
spare the King either for all his cruelty to me.'

Then the Little Man flew about like lightning, zig-zag, hither and
thither, and whomever he touched with his cudgel fell to the ground,
and dared not move.

The King was now seized with alarm, and, begging on his knees that his
life might be spared, he rendered up his kingdom and gave his Daughter
to the Soldier to be his wife.




The Goosegirl


There was once an old Queen whose husband had been dead for many
years, and she had a very beautiful daughter. When she grew up she was
betrothed to a Prince in a distant country. When the time came for the
maiden to be sent into this distant country to be married, the old
Queen packed up quantities of clothes and jewels, gold and silver,
cups and ornaments, and, in fact, everything suitable to a royal
outfit, for she loved her daughter very dearly.

She also sent a Waiting-woman to travel with her, and to put her hand
into that of the bridegroom. They each had a horse. The Princess's
horse was called Falada, and it could speak.

When the hour of departure came, the old Queen went to her bedroom,
and with a sharp little knife cut her finger and made it bleed. Then
she held a piece of white cambric under it, and let three drops of
blood fall on to it. This cambric she gave to her daughter, and said,
'Dear child, take good care of this; it will stand you in good stead
on the journey.' They then bade each other a sorrowful farewell. The
Princess hid the piece of cambric in her bosom, mounted her horse, and
set out to her bridegroom's country.

When they had ridden for a time the Princess became very thirsty, and
said to the Waiting-woman, 'Get down and fetch me some water in my cup
from the stream. I must have something to drink.'

'If you are thirsty,' said the Waiting-woman, 'dismount yourself, lie
down by the water and drink. I don't choose to be your servant.'

So, in her great thirst, the Princess dismounted and stooped down to
the stream and drank, as she might not have her golden cup. The poor
Princess said, 'Alas!' and the drops of blood answered, 'If your
mother knew this, it would break her heart.'

The royal bride was humble, so she said nothing, but mounted her horse
again. Then they rode several miles further; but the day was warm, the
sun was scorching, and the Princess was soon thirsty again.

When they reached a river she called out again to her Waiting-woman,
'Get down, and give me some water in my golden cup!'

She had forgotten all about the rude words which had been said to her.
But the Waiting-woman answered more haughtily than ever, 'If you want
to drink, get the water for yourself. I won't be your servant.'

Being very thirsty, the Princess dismounted, and knelt by the flowing
water. She cried, and said, 'Ah me!' and the drops of blood answered,
'If your mother knew this it would break her heart.'

While she stooped over the water to drink, the piece of cambric with
the drops of blood on it fell out of her bosom, and floated away on
the stream; but she never noticed this in her great fear. The
Waiting-woman, however, had seen it, and rejoiced at getting more
power over the bride, who, by losing the drops of blood, had become
weak and powerless.

Now, when she was about to mount her horse Falada again, the
Waiting-woman said, 'By rights, Falada belongs to me; this jade will
do for you!'

The poor little Princess was obliged to give way. Then the
Waiting-woman, in a harsh voice, ordered her to take off her royal
robes, and to put on her own mean garments. Finally, she forced her to
swear before heaven that she would not tell a creature at the Court
what had taken place. Had she not taken the oath she would have been
killed on the spot. But Falada saw all this and marked it.

The Waiting-woman then mounted Falada and put the real bride on her
poor jade, and they continued their journey.

There was great rejoicing when they arrived at the castle. The Prince
hurried towards them, and lifted the Waiting-woman from her horse,
thinking she was his bride. She was led upstairs, but the real
Princess had to stay below.

The old King looked out of the window and saw the delicate, pretty
little creature standing in the courtyard; so he went to the bridal
apartments and asked the bride about her companion, who was left
standing in the courtyard, and wished to know who she was.

'I picked her up on the way, and brought her with me for company. Give
the girl something to do to keep her from idling.'

But the old King had no work for her, and could not think of anything.
At last he said, 'I have a little lad who looks after the geese; she
may help him.'

The boy was called little Conrad, and the real bride was sent with him
to look after the geese.

Soon after, the false bride said to the Prince, 'Dear husband, I pray
you do me a favour.'

He answered, 'That will I gladly.'

'Well, then, let the knacker be called to cut off the head of the
horse I rode; it angered me on the way.'

Really, she was afraid that the horse would speak, and tell of her
treatment of the Princess. So it was settled, and the faithful Falada
had to die.

When this came to the ear of the real Princess, she promised the
knacker a piece of gold if he would do her a slight service. There was
a great dark gateway to the town, through which she had to pass every
morning and evening. 'Would he nail up Falada's head in this gateway,
so that she might see him as she passed?'

  [Illustration: {Alas! dear Falada, there thou hangest.}]

The knacker promised to do as she wished, and when the horse's head
was cut off, he hung it up in the dark gateway. In the early
morning, when she and Conrad went through the gateway, she said in
passing--

    'Alas! dear Falada, there thou hangest.'

And the Head answered--

    'Alas! Queen's daughter, there thou gangest.
    If thy mother knew thy fate,
    Her heart would break with grief so great.'

Then they passed on out of the town, right into the fields, with the
geese. When they reached the meadow, the Princess sat down on the
grass and let down her hair. It shone like pure gold, and when little
Conrad saw it, he was so delighted that he wanted to pluck some out;
but she said--

    'Blow, blow, little breeze,
    And Conrad's hat seize.
    Let him join in the chase
    While away it is whirled,
    Till my tresses are curled
    And I rest in my place.'

Then a strong wind sprang up, which blew away Conrad's hat right over
the fields, and he had to run after it. When he came back, she had
finished combing her hair, and it was all put up again; so he could
not get a single hair. This made him very sulky, and he would not say
another word to her. And they tended the geese till evening, when they
went home.

Next morning, when they passed under the gateway, the Princess said--

    'Alas! dear Falada, there thou hangest.'

Falada answered:--

    'Alas! Queen's daughter, there thou gangest.
    If thy mother knew thy fate,
    Her heart would break with grief so great.'

Again, when they reached the meadows, the Princess undid her hair and
began combing it. Conrad ran to pluck some out; but she said quickly--

    'Blow, blow, little breeze,
    And Conrad's hat seize.
    Let him join in the chase
    While away it is whirled,
    Till my tresses are curled
    And I rest in my place.'

The wind sprang up and blew Conrad's hat far away over the fields, and
he had to run after it. When he came back the hair was all put up
again, and he could not pull a single hair out. And they tended the
geese till the evening. When they got home Conrad went to the old
King, and said, 'I won't tend the geese with that maiden again.'

'Why not?' asked the King.

'Oh, she vexes me every day.'

The old King then ordered him to say what she did to vex him.

Conrad said, 'In the morning, when we pass under the dark gateway with
the geese, she talks to a horse's head which is hung up on the wall.
She says--

    'Alas! Falada, there thou hangest,'

and the Head answers--

    'Alas! Queen's daughter, there thou gangest.
    If thy mother knew thy fate,
    Her heart would break with grief so great.'

Then Conrad went on to tell the King all that happened in the meadow,
and how he had to run after his hat in the wind.

The old King ordered Conrad to go out next day as usual. Then he
placed himself behind the dark gateway, and heard the Princess
speaking to Falada's head. He also followed her into the field, and
hid himself behind a bush, and with his own eyes he saw the Goosegirl
and the lad come driving the geese into the field. Then, after a
time, he saw the girl let down her hair, which glittered in the sun.
Directly after this, she said--

    'Blow, blow, little breeze,
    And Conrad's hat seize.
    Let him join in the chase
    While away it is whirled,
    Till my tresses are curled
    And I rest in my place.'

Then came a puff of wind, which carried off Conrad's hat and he had to
run after it. While he was away, the maiden combed and did up her
hair; and all this the old King observed. Thereupon he went away
unnoticed; and in the evening, when the Goosegirl came home, he called
her aside and asked why she did all these things.

'That I may not tell you, nor may I tell any human creature; for I
have sworn it under the open sky, because if I had not done so I
should have lost my life.'

He pressed her sorely, and gave her no peace, but he could get nothing
out of her. Then he said, 'If you won't tell me, then tell your
sorrows to the iron stove there'; and he went away.

She crept up to the stove, and, beginning to weep and lament,
unburdened her heart to it, and said: 'Here I am, forsaken by all the
world, and yet I am a Princess. A false Waiting-woman brought me to
such a pass that I had to take off my royal robes. Then she took my
place with my bridegroom, while I have to do mean service as a
Goosegirl. If my mother knew it she would break her heart.'

The old King stood outside by the pipes of the stove, and heard all
that she said. Then he came back, and told her to go away from the
stove. He caused royal robes to be put upon her, and her beauty was a
marvel. The old King called his son, and told him that he had a false
bride--she was only a Waiting-woman; but the true bride was here, the
so-called Goosegirl.

The young Prince was charmed with her youth and beauty. A great
banquet was prepared, to which all the courtiers and good friends were
bidden. The bridegroom sat at the head of the table, with the Princess
on one side and the Waiting-woman at the other; but she was dazzled,
and did not recognise the Princess in her brilliant apparel.

When they had eaten and drunk and were all very merry, the old King
put a riddle to the Waiting-woman. 'What does a person deserve who
deceives his master?' telling the whole story, and ending by asking,
'What doom does he deserve?'

The false bride answered, 'No better than this. He must be put stark
naked into a barrel stuck with nails, and be dragged along by two
white horses from street to street till he is dead.'

'That is your own doom,' said the King, 'and the judgment shall be
carried out.'

When the sentence was fulfilled, the young Prince married his true
bride, and they ruled their kingdom together in peace and happiness.

  [Illustration: {Blow, blow, little breeze,
                  And Conrad's hat seize.}]




  [Illustration: {A goose.}]

The Golden Goose


There was once a man who had three sons. The youngest of them was
called Simpleton; he was scorned and despised by the others, and kept
in the background.

The eldest son was going into the forest to cut wood, and before he
started, his mother gave him a nice sweet cake and a bottle of wine to
take with him, so that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst. In
the wood he met a little, old, grey Man, who bade him good-day, and
said, 'Give me a bit of the cake in your pocket, and let me have a
drop of your wine. I am so hungry and thirsty.'

But the clever son said: 'If I give you my cake and wine, I shan't
have enough for myself. Be off with you.'

He left the little Man standing there, and went on his way. But he had
not been long at work, cutting down a tree, before he made a false
stroke, and dug the axe into his own arm, and he was obliged to go
home to have it bound up.

Now, this was no accident; it was brought about by the little grey
Man.

The second son now had to go into the forest to cut wood, and, like
the eldest, his mother gave him a sweet cake and a bottle of wine. In
the same way the little grey Man met him, and asked for a piece of his
cake and a drop of his wine. But the second son made the same sensible
answer, 'If I give you any, I shall have the less for myself. Be off
out of my way,' and he went on.

His punishment, however, was not long delayed. After a few blows at
the tree, he hit his own leg, and had to be carried home.

Then Simpleton said, 'Let me go to cut the wood, father.'

But his father said, 'Your brothers have only come to harm by it; you
had better leave it alone. You know nothing about it.' But Simpleton
begged so hard to be allowed to go that at last his father said,
'Well, off you go then. You will be wiser when you have hurt
yourself.'

  [Illustration: There stands an old tree; cut it down, and you will
    find something at the roots.]

His mother gave him a cake which was only mixed with water and baked
in the ashes, and a bottle of sour beer. When he reached the forest,
like the others, he met the little grey Man, who greeted him, and
said, 'Give me a bit of your cake and a drop of your wine. I am so
hungry and thirsty.'

Simpleton answered, 'I only have a cake baked in the ashes, and some
sour beer; but, if you like such fare, we will sit down and eat it
together.'

So they sat down; but when Simpleton pulled out his cake it was a
sweet, nice cake, and his sour beer was turned into good wine. So they
ate and drank, and the little Man said, 'As you have such a good
heart, and are willing to share your goods, I will give you good luck.
There stands an old tree; cut it down, and you will find something at
the roots.'

  [Illustration: So now there were seven people running behind
    Simpleton and his Goose.]

So saying he disappeared.

Simpleton cut down the tree, and when it fell, lo, and behold! a Goose
was sitting among the roots, and its feathers were of pure gold. He
picked it up, and taking it with him, went to an inn, where he meant
to stay the night. The landlord had three daughters, who saw the
Goose, and were very curious as to what kind of bird it could be, and
wanted to get one of its golden feathers.

The eldest thought, 'There will soon be some opportunity for me to
pull out one of the feathers,' and when Simpleton went outside, she
took hold of its wing to pluck out a feather; but her hand stuck fast,
and she could not get away.

Soon after, the second sister came up, meaning also to pluck out one
of the golden feathers; but she had hardly touched her sister when she
found herself held fast.

Lastly, the third one came, with the same intention, but the others
screamed out, 'Keep away! For goodness sake, keep away!'

But she, not knowing why she was to keep away, thought, 'Why should I
not be there, if they are there?'

So she ran up, but as soon as she touched her sisters she had to stay
hanging on to them, and they all had to pass the night like this.

  [Illustration: And so they followed up hill and down dale after
    Simpleton and his Goose.]

In the morning, Simpleton took up the Goose under his arm, without
noticing the three girls hanging on behind. They had to keep running
behind, dodging his legs right and left.

In the middle of the fields they met the Parson, who, when he saw the
procession, cried out: 'For shame, you bold girls! Why do you run
after the lad like that? Do you call that proper behaviour?'

Then he took hold of the hand of the youngest girl to pull her away;
but no sooner had he touched her than he felt himself held fast, and
he, too, had to run behind.

Soon after the Sexton came up, and, seeing his master the Parson
treading on the heels of the three girls, cried out in amazement,
'Hullo, your Reverence! Whither away so fast? Don't forget that we
have a christening!'

So saying, he plucked the Parson by the sleeve, and soon found that he
could not get away.

As this party of five, one behind the other, tramped on, two Peasants
came along the road, carrying their hoes. The Parson called them, and
asked them to set the Sexton and himself free. But as soon as ever
they touched the Sexton they were held fast, so now there were seven
people running behind Simpleton and his Goose.

By-and-by they reached a town, where a King ruled whose only daughter
was so solemn that nothing and nobody could make her laugh. So the
King had proclaimed that whoever could make her laugh should marry
her.

When Simpleton heard this he took his Goose, with all his following,
before her, and when she saw these seven people running, one behind
another, she burst into fits of laughter, and seemed as if she could
never stop.

Thereupon Simpleton asked her in marriage. But the King did not like
him for a son-in-law, and he made all sorts of conditions. First, he
said Simpleton must bring him a man who could drink up a cellar full
of wine.

Then Simpleton at once thought of the little grey Man who might be
able to help him, and he went out to the forest to look for him. On
the very spot where the tree that he had cut down had stood, he saw a
man sitting with a very sad face. Simpleton asked him what was the
matter, and he answered--

'I am so thirsty, and I can't quench my thirst. I hate cold water, and
I have already emptied a cask of wine; but what is a drop like that on
a burning stone?'

'Well, there I can help you,' said Simpleton. 'Come with me, and you
shall soon have enough to drink and to spare.'

He led him to the King's cellar, and the Man set to upon the great
casks, and he drank and drank till his sides ached, and by the end of
the day the cellar was empty.

Then again Simpleton demanded his bride. But the King was annoyed that
a wretched fellow called 'Simpleton' should have his daughter, and he
made new conditions. He was now to find a man who could eat up a
mountain of bread.

Simpleton did not reflect long, but went straight to the forest, and
there in the self-same place sat a man tightening a strap round his
body, and making a very miserable face. He said: 'I have eaten up a
whole ovenful of rolls, but what is the good of that when any one is
as hungry as I am. I am never satisfied. I have to tighten my belt
every day if I am not to die of hunger.'

Simpleton was delighted, and said: 'Get up and come with me. You
shall have enough to eat.'

And he took him to the Court, where the King had caused all the flour
in the kingdom to be brought together, and a huge mountain of bread to
be baked. The Man from the forest sat down before it and began to eat,
and at the end of the day the whole mountain had disappeared.

Now, for the third time, Simpleton asked for his bride. But again the
King tried to find an excuse, and demanded a ship which could sail on
land as well as at sea.

'As soon as you sail up in it, you shall have my daughter,' he said.

Simpleton went straight to the forest, and there sat the little grey
Man to whom he had given his cake. The little Man said: 'I have eaten
and drunk for you, and now I will give you the ship, too. I do it all
because you were merciful to me.'

Then he gave him the ship which could sail on land as well as at sea,
and when the King saw it he could no longer withhold his daughter. The
marriage was celebrated, and, at the King's death, the Simpleton
inherited the kingdom, and lived long and happily with his wife.

  [Illustration: The King could no longer withhold his daughter.]




The Water of Life


There was once a King who was so ill that it was thought impossible
his life could be saved. He had three sons, and they were all in great
distress on his account, and they went into the castle gardens and
wept at the thought that he must die. An old man came up to them and
asked the cause of their grief. They told him that their father was
dying, and nothing could save him. The old man said, 'There is only
one remedy which I know; it is the Water of Life. If he drinks of it,
he will recover, but it is very difficult to find.'

The eldest son said, 'I will soon find it'; and he went to the sick
man to ask permission to go in search of the Water of Life, as that
was the only thing to cure him.

'No,' said the King. 'The danger is too great. I would rather die.'

But he persisted so long that at last the King gave his permission.

The Prince thought, 'If I bring this water I shall be the favourite,
and I shall inherit the kingdom.'

So he set off, and when he had ridden some distance he came upon a
Dwarf standing in the road, who cried, 'Whither away so fast?'

'Stupid little fellow,' said the Prince, proudly; 'what business is it
of yours?' and rode on.

The little man was very angry, and made an evil vow.

Soon after, the Prince came to a gorge in the mountains, and the
further he rode the narrower it became, till he could go no further.
His horse could neither go forward nor turn round for him to dismount;
so there he sat, jammed in.

The sick King waited a long time for him, but he never came back.
Then the second son said, 'Father, let me go and find the Water of
Life,' thinking, 'if my brother is dead I shall have the kingdom.'

The King at first refused to let him go, but at last he gave his
consent. So the Prince started on the same road as his brother, and
met the same Dwarf, who stopped him and asked where he was going in
such a hurry.

'Little Snippet, what does it matter to you?' he said, and rode away
without looking back.

But the Dwarf cast a spell over him, and he, too, got into a narrow
gorge like his brother, where he could neither go backwards nor
forwards.

This is what happens to the haughty.

As the second son also stayed away, the youngest one offered to go and
fetch the Water of Life, and at last the King was obliged to let him
go.

When he met the Dwarf, and he asked him where he was hurrying to, he
stopped and said, 'I am searching for the Water of Life, because my
father is dying.'

'Do you know where it is to be found?'

'No,' said the Prince.

'As you have spoken pleasantly to me, and not been haughty like your
false brothers, I will help you and tell you how to find the Water of
Life. It flows from a fountain in the courtyard of an enchanted
castle; but you will never get in unless I give you an iron rod and
two loaves of bread. With the rod strike three times on the iron gate
of the castle, and it will spring open. Inside you will find two Lions
with wide-open jaws, but if you throw a loaf to each they will be
quiet. Then you must make haste to fetch the Water of Life before it
strikes twelve, or the gates of the castle will close and you will be
shut in.'

The Prince thanked him, took the rod and the loaves, and set off. When
he reached the castle all was just as the Dwarf had said. At the third
knock the gate flew open, and when he had pacified the Lions with the
loaves, he walked into the castle. In the great hall he found several
enchanted Princes, and he took the rings from their fingers. He also
took a sword and a loaf, which were lying by them. On passing into the
next room he found a beautiful Maiden, who rejoiced at his coming. She
embraced him, and said that he had saved her, and should have the
whole of her kingdom; and if he would come back in a year she would
marry him. She also told him where to find the fountain with the
enchanted water; but, she said, he must make haste to get out of the
castle before the clock struck twelve.

Then he went on, and came to a room where there was a beautiful bed
freshly made, and as he was very tired he thought he would take a
little rest; so he lay down and fell asleep. When he woke it was
striking a quarter to twelve. He sprang up in a fright, and ran to the
fountain, and took some of the water in a cup which was lying near,
and then hurried away. The clock struck just as he reached the iron
gate, and it banged so quickly that it took off a bit of his heel.

He was rejoiced at having got some of the Water of Life, and hastened
on his homeward journey. He again passed the Dwarf, who said, when he
saw the sword and the loaf, 'Those things will be of much service to
you. You will be able to strike down whole armies with the sword, and
the loaf will never come to an end.'

The Prince did not want to go home without his brothers, and he said,
'Good Dwarf, can you not tell me where my brothers are? They went in
search of the Water of Life before I did, but they never came back.'

'They are both stuck fast in a narrow mountain gorge. I cast a spell
over them because of their pride.'

Then the Prince begged so hard that they might be released that at
last the Dwarf yielded; but he warned him against them, and said,
'Beware of them; they have bad hearts.'

  [Illustration: {Good Dwarf, can you not tell me where my brothers
    are?}]

He was delighted to see his brothers when they came back, and told
them all that had happened to him; how he had found the Water of
Life, and brought a goblet full with him. How he had released a
beautiful Princess, who would wait a year for him and then marry him,
and he would become a great Prince.

Then they rode away together, and came to a land where famine and war
were raging. The King thought he would be utterly ruined, so great was
the destitution.

The Prince went to him and gave him the loaf, and with it he fed and
satisfied his whole kingdom. The Prince also gave him his sword, and
he smote the whole army of his enemies with it, and then he was able
to live in peace and quiet. Then the Prince took back his sword and
his loaf, and the three brothers rode on. But they had to pass through
two more countries where war and famine were raging, and each time the
Prince gave his sword and his loaf to the King, and in this way he
saved three kingdoms.

After that they took a ship and crossed the sea. During the passage
the two elder brothers said to each other, 'Our youngest brother found
the Water of Life, and we did not, so our father will give him the
kingdom which we ought to have, and he will take away our fortune from
us.'

This thought made them very vindictive, and they made up their minds
to get rid of him. They waited till he was asleep, and then they
emptied the Water of Life from his goblet and took it themselves, and
filled up his cup with salt sea water.

As soon as they got home the youngest Prince took his goblet to the
King, so that he might drink of the water which was to make him well;
but after drinking only a few drops of the sea water he became more
ill than ever. As he was bewailing himself, his two elder sons came to
him and accused the youngest of trying to poison him, and said that
they had the real Water of Life, and gave him some. No sooner had he
drunk it than he felt better, and he soon became as strong and well as
he had been in his youth.

Then the two went to their youngest brother, and mocked him, saying,
'It was you who found the Water of Life; you had all the trouble,
while we have the reward. You should have been wiser, and kept your
eyes open; we stole it from you while you were asleep on the ship.
When the end of the year comes, one of us will go and bring away the
beautiful Princess. But don't dare to betray us. Our father will
certainly not believe you, and if you say a single word you will lose
your life; your only chance is to keep silence.'

The old King was very angry with his youngest son, thinking that he
had tried to take his life. So he had the Court assembled to give
judgment upon him, and it was decided that he must be secretly got out
of the way.

One day when the Prince was going out hunting, thinking no evil, the
King's Huntsman was ordered to go with him. Seeing the Huntsman look
sad, the Prince said to him, 'My good Huntsman, what is the matter
with you?'

The Huntsman answered, 'I can't bear to tell you, and yet I must.'

The Prince said, 'Say it out; whatever it is I will forgive you.'

'Alas!' said the Huntsman, 'I am to shoot you dead; it is the King's
command.'

The Prince was horror-stricken, and said, 'Dear Huntsman, do not kill
me, give me my life. Let me have your dress, and you shall have my
royal robes.'

The Huntsman said, 'I will gladly do so; I could never have shot you.'
So they changed clothes, and the Huntsman went home, but the Prince
wandered away into the forest.

After a time three wagon loads of gold and precious stones came to the
King for his youngest son. They were sent by the Kings who had been
saved by the Prince's sword and his miraculous loaf, and who now
wished to show their gratitude.

Then the old King thought, 'What if my son really was innocent?' and
said to his people, 'If only he were still alive! How sorry I am that
I ordered him to be killed.'

'He is still alive,' said the Huntsman. 'I could not find it in my
heart to carry out your commands,' and he told the King what had taken
place.

A load fell from the King's heart on hearing the good news, and he
sent out a proclamation to all parts of his kingdom that his son was
to come home, where he would be received with great favour.

In the meantime, the Princess had caused a road to be made of pure
shining gold leading to her castle, and told her people that whoever
came riding straight along it would be the true bridegroom, and they
were to admit him. But any one who came either on one side of the road
or the other would not be the right one, and he was not to be let in.

When the year had almost passed, the eldest Prince thought that he
would hurry to the Princess, and by giving himself out as her
deliverer would gain a wife and a kingdom as well. So he rode away,
and when he saw the beautiful golden road he thought it would be a
thousand pities to ride upon it; so he turned aside, and rode to the
right of it. But when he reached the gate the people told him that he
was not the true bridegroom, and he had to go away.

Soon after the second Prince came, and when he saw the golden road he
thought it would be a thousand pities for his horse to tread upon it;
so he turned aside, and rode up on the left of it. But when he reached
the gate he was also told that he was not the true bridegroom, and,
like his brother, was turned away.

When the year had quite come to an end, the third Prince came out of
the wood to ride to his beloved, and through her to forget all his
past sorrows. So on he went, thinking only of her, and wishing to be
with her; and he never even saw the golden road. His horse cantered
right along the middle of it, and when he reached the gate it was
flung open and the Princess received him joyfully, and called him her
Deliverer, and the Lord of her Kingdom. Their marriage was celebrated
without delay, and with much rejoicing. When it was over, she told him
that his father had called him back and forgiven him. So he went to
him and told him everything; how his brothers had deceived him, and
how they had forced him to keep silence. The old King wanted to punish
them, but they had taken a ship and sailed away over the sea, and they
never came back as long as they lived.

  [Illustration: {A dwarf.}]




Clever Grethel


There was once a cook called Grethel, who wore shoes with red
rosettes; and when she went out in them, she turned and twisted about
gaily, and thought, 'How fine I am!'

After her walk she would take a draught of wine, in her
light-heartedness; and as wine gives an appetite, she would then taste
some of the dishes that she was cooking, saying to herself, 'The cook
is bound to know how the food tastes.'

It so happened that one day her master said to her, 'Grethel, I have a
guest coming to-night; roast me two fowls in your best style.'

'It shall be done, sir!' answered Grethel. So she killed the chickens,
scalded and plucked them, and then put them on the spit; towards
evening she put them down to the fire to roast. They got brown and
crisp, but still the guest did not come. Then Grethel called to her
Master, 'If the guest does not come I must take the fowls from the
fire; but it will be a thousand pities if they are not eaten soon
while they are juicy.'

Her Master said, 'I will go and hasten the guest myself.'

Hardly had her Master turned his back before Grethel laid the spit
with the fowls on it on one side, and said to herself, 'It's thirsty
work standing over the fire so long. Who knows when he will come. I'll
go down into the cellar in the meantime and take a drop of wine.'

She ran down and held a jug to the tap, then said, 'Here's to your
health, Grethel,' and took a good pull. 'Drinking leads to drinking,'
she said, 'and it's not easy to give it up,' and again she took a good
pull. Then she went upstairs and put the fowls to the fire again,
poured some butter over them, and turned the spit round with a will.
It smelt so good that she thought, 'There may be something wanting, I
must have a taste.' And she passed her finger over the fowls and put
it in her mouth. 'Ah, how good they are; it's a sin and a shame that
there's nobody to eat them.' She ran to the window to see if her
Master was coming with the guest, but she saw nobody. Then she went
back to the fowls again, and thought, 'One wing is catching a little,
better to eat it--and eat it I will.' So she cut it off and ate it
with much enjoyment. When it was finished, she thought, 'The other
must follow, or the Master will notice that something is wanting.'
When the wings were consumed she went back to the window again to look
for her Master, but no one was in sight.

'Who knows,' she thought. 'I dare say they won't come at all; they
must have dropped in somewhere else.' Then she said to herself, 'Now,
Grethel, don't be afraid, eat it all up: why should the good food be
wasted? When it's all gone you can rest; run and have another drink
and then finish it up.' So she went down to the cellar, took a good
drink, and contentedly ate up the rest of the fowl. When it had all
disappeared and still no Master came, Grethel looked at the other fowl
and said, 'Where one is gone the other must follow. What is good for
one is right for the other. If I have a drink first I shall be none
the worse.' So she took another hearty pull at the jug, and then she
sent the other fowl after the first one.

In the height of her enjoyment, her Master came back, and cried,
'Hurry, Grethel, the guest is just coming.'

'Very well, sir, I'll soon have it ready,' answered Grethel.

Her Master went to see if the table was properly laid, and took the
big carving-knife with which he meant to cut up the fowls, to sharpen
it. In the meantime the guest came and knocked politely at the door.
Grethel ran to see who was there, and, seeing the guest, she put her
finger to her lips and said, 'Be quiet, and get away quickly; if my
Master catches you it will be the worse for you. He certainly
invited you to supper, but only with the intention of cutting off both
your ears. You can hear him sharpening his knife now.'

  [Illustration: {Then he ran after him, still holding the
    carving-knife, and cried, 'Only one, only one!'}]

The guest heard the knife being sharpened, and hurried off down the
steps as fast as he could.

Grethel ran with great agility to her Master, shrieking, 'A fine guest
you have invited, indeed!'

'Why, what's the matter, Grethel? What do you mean?'

'Well,' she said, 'he has taken the two fowls that I had just put upon
the dish, and run off with them.'

'That's a clever trick!' said her Master, regretting his fine fowls.
'If he had only left me one so that I had something to eat.'

He called out to him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear.
Then he ran after him, still holding the carving-knife, and cried,
'Only one, only one!'--meaning that the guest should leave him one
fowl; but the guest only thought that he meant he was to give him one
ear, and he ran as if he was pursued by fire, and so took both his
ears safely home.




The King of the Golden Mountain


There was once a Merchant who had two children, a boy and a girl. They
were both small, and not old enough to run about. He had also two
richly-laden ships at sea, and just as he was expecting to make a
great deal of money by the merchandise, news came that they had both
been lost. So now instead of being a rich man he was quite poor, and
had nothing left but one field near the town.

To turn his thoughts from his misfortune, he went out into this field,
and as he was walking up and down a little black Mannikin suddenly
appeared before him, and asked why he was so sad. The Merchant said,
'I would tell you at once, if you could help me.'

'Who knows,' answered the little Mannikin. 'Perhaps I could help you.'

Then the Merchant told him that all his wealth had been lost in a
wreck, and that now he had nothing left but this field.

'Don't worry yourself,' said the Mannikin. 'If you will promise to
bring me in twelve years' time the first thing which rubs against your
legs when you go home, you shall have as much gold as you want.'

The Merchant thought, 'What could it be but my dog?' He never thought
of his boy, but said Yes, and gave the Mannikin his bond signed and
sealed, and went home.

When he reached the house his little son, delighted to hold on to the
benches and totter towards his father, seized him by the leg to steady
himself.

The Merchant was horror-stricken, for his vow came into his head, and
now he knew what he had promised to give away. But as he still found
no gold in his chests, he thought it must only have been a joke of
the Mannikin's. A month later he went up into the loft to gather
together some old tin to sell it, and there he found a great heap of
gold on the floor. So he was soon up in the world again, bought and
sold, became a richer merchant than ever, and was altogether
contented.

In the meantime the boy had grown up, and he was both clever and wise.
But the nearer the end of the twelve years came, the more sorrowful
the Merchant grew; you could even see his misery in his face. One day
his son asked him what was the matter, but his father would not tell
him. The boy, however, persisted so long that at last he told him
that, without knowing what he was doing, he had promised to give him
up at the end of twelve years to a little black Mannikin, in return
for a quantity of gold. He had given his hand and seal on it, and the
time was now near for him to go.

Then his son said, 'O father, don't be frightened, it will be all
right. The little black Mannikin has no power over me.'

When the time came, the son asked a blessing of the Priest, and he and
his father went to the field together; and the son made a circle
within which they took their places.

When the little black Mannikin appeared, he said to the father, 'Have
you brought what you promised me?'

The man was silent, but his son said, 'What do you want?'

The Mannikin said, 'My business is with your father, and not with
you.'

The son answered, 'You deceived and cheated my father. Give me back
his bond.'

'Oh no!' said the little man; 'I won't give up my rights.'

They talked to each other for a long time, and at last they decided
that, as the son no longer belonged to his father, and declined to
belong to his foe, he should get into a boat on a flowing stream, and
his father should push it off himself, thus giving him up to the
stream.

So the youth took leave of his father, got into the boat, and his
father pushed it off. Then, thinking that his son was lost to him for
ever, he went home and sorrowed for him. The little boat, however, did
not sink, it drifted quietly down the stream, and the youth sat in it
in perfect safety. It drifted for a long time, till at last it stuck
fast on an unknown shore. The youth landed, and seeing a beautiful
castle near, walked towards it. As he passed under the doorway,
however, a spell fell upon him. He went through all the rooms, but
found them empty, till he came to the very last one, where a Serpent
lay coiling and uncoiling itself. The Serpent was really an enchanted
maiden, who was delighted when she saw the youth, and said, 'Have you
come at last, my preserver? I have been waiting twelve years for you.
This whole kingdom is bewitched, and you must break the spell.'

'How am I to do that?' he asked.

She said, 'To-night, twelve black men hung with chains will appear,
and they will ask what you are doing here. But do not speak a word,
whatever they do or say to you. They will torment you, strike, and
pinch you, but don't say a word. At twelve o'clock they will have to
go away. On the second night twelve more will come, and on the third
twenty-four. These will cut off your head. But at twelve o'clock their
power goes, and if you have borne it, and not spoken a word, I shall
be saved. Then I will come to you, and bring a little flask containing
the Water of Life, with which I will sprinkle you, and you will be
brought to life again, as sound and well as ever you were.'

Then he said, 'I will gladly save you!'

Everything happened just as she had said. The black men could not
force a word out of him; and on the third night the Serpent became a
beautiful Princess, who brought the Water of Life as she had promised,
and restored the youth to life. Then she fell on his neck and kissed
him, and there were great rejoicings all over the castle.

Their marriage was celebrated, and he became King of the Golden
Mountain.

  [Illustration: {The Son made a circle, and his Father and he
    took their places within it, and the little black Mannikin
    appeared.}]

They lived happily together, and in course of time a beautiful boy
was born to them.

When eight years had passed, the King's heart grew tender within him
as he thought of his father, and he wanted to go home to see him. But
the Queen did not want him to go. She said, 'I know it will be to my
misfortune.' However, he gave her no peace till she agreed to let him
go. On his departure she gave him a wishing-ring, and said, 'Take this
ring, and put it on your finger, and you will at once be at the place
where you wish to be. Only, you must promise never to use it to wish
me away from here to be with you at your father's.'

He made the promise, and put the ring on his finger; he then wished
himself before the town where his father lived, and at the same moment
found himself at the gate. But the sentry would not let him in because
his clothes, though of rich material, were of such strange cut. So he
went up a mountain, where a Shepherd lived, and, exchanging clothing
with him, put on his old smock, and passed into the town unnoticed.

When he reached his father he began making himself known; but his
father, never thinking that it was his son, said that it was true he
had once had a son, but he had long been dead. But, he added, seeing
that he was a poor Shepherd, he would give him a plate of food.

The supposed Shepherd said to his parents, 'I am indeed your son. Is
there no mark on my body by which you may know me?'

His mother said, 'Yes, our son has a strawberry mark under his right
arm.'

He pushed up his shirt sleeve, and there was the strawberry mark; so
they no longer doubted that he was their son. He told them that he was
the King of the Golden Mountain, his wife was a Princess, and they had
a little son seven years old.

'That can't be true,' said his father. 'You are a fine sort of King to
come home in a tattered Shepherd's smock.'

His son grew angry, and, without stopping to reflect, turned his ring
round and wished his wife and son to appear. In a moment they both
stood before him; but his wife did nothing but weep and lament, and
said that he had broken his promise, and by so doing had made her very
unhappy. He said, 'I have acted incautiously, but from no bad motive,'
and he tried to soothe her.

She appeared to be calmed, but really she nourished evil intentions
towards him in her heart.

Shortly after he took her outside the town to the field, and showed
her the stream down which he had drifted in the little boat. Then he
said, 'I am tired; I want to rest a little.'

So she sat down, and he rested his head upon her lap, and soon fell
fast asleep. As soon as he was asleep, she drew the ring from his
finger, and drew herself gently away from him, leaving only her
slipper behind. Last of all, taking her child in her arms, she wished
herself back in her own kingdom. When he woke up, he found himself
quite deserted; wife and child were gone, the ring had disappeared
from his finger, and only her slipper remained as a token.

'I can certainly never go home to my parents,' he said. 'They would
say I was a sorcerer. I must go away and walk till I reach my own
kingdom again.'

So he went away, and at last he came to a mountain, where three Giants
were quarrelling about the division of their father's property. When
they saw him passing, they called him up, and said, 'Little people
have sharp wits,' and asked him to divide their inheritance for them.

It consisted, first, of a sword, with which in one's hand, if one
said, 'All heads off, mine alone remain,' every head fell to the
ground. Secondly, of a mantle which rendered any one putting it on
invisible. Thirdly, of a pair of boots which transported the wearer to
whatever place he wished.

He said, 'Give me the three articles so that I may see if they are all
in good condition.'

So they gave him the mantle, and he at once became invisible. He took
his own shape again, and said, 'The mantle is good; now give me the
sword.'

But they said, 'No, we can't give you the sword. If you were to say,
"All heads off, mine alone remain," all our heads would fall, and
yours would be the only one left.'

At last, however, they gave it to him, on condition that he was to try
it on a tree. He did as they wished, and the sword went through the
tree trunk as if it had been a straw. Then he wanted the boots, but
they said, 'No, we won't give them away. If you were to put them on
and wish yourself on the top of the mountain, we should be left
standing here without anything.'

'No,' said he; 'I won't do that.'

So they gave him the boots too; but when he had all three he could
think of nothing but his wife and child, and said to himself, 'Oh, if
only I were on the Golden Mountain again!' and immediately he
disappeared from the sight of the Giants, and there was an end of
their inheritance.

When he approached his castle he heard sounds of music, fiddles and
flutes, and shouts of joy. People told him that his wife was
celebrating her marriage with another husband. He was filled with
rage, and said, 'The false creature! She deceived me, and deserted me
when I was asleep.'

Then he put on his mantle, and went to the castle, invisible to all.
When he went into the hall, where a great feast was spread with the
richest foods and the costliest wines, the guests were joking and
laughing while they ate and drank. The Queen sat on her throne in
their midst in gorgeous clothing, with the crown on her head. He
placed himself behind her, and no one saw him. Whenever the Queen put
a piece of meat on her plate, he took it away and ate it, and when her
glass was filled he took it away and drank it. Her plate and her glass
were constantly refilled, but she never had anything, for it
disappeared at once. At last she grew frightened, got up, and went to
her room in tears, but he followed her there too. She said to herself,
'Am I still in the power of the demon? Did my preserver never come?'

He struck her in the face, and said, 'Did your preserver never come?
He is with you now, deceiver that you are. Did I deserve such
treatment at your hands?' Then he made himself visible, and went into
the hall, and cried, 'The wedding is stopped, the real King has come.'

The Kings, Princes, and Nobles who were present laughed him to scorn.
But he only said, 'Will you go, or will you not?' They tried to seize
him, but he drew his sword and said,

'All heads off, mine alone remain.'

Then all their heads fell to the ground, and he remained sole King and
Lord of the Golden Mountain.

  [Illustration: {A fairy.}]




  [Illustration: {Once upon a time a poor peasant, named Crabb, was
    taking a load of wood drawn by two oxen to the town for sale.}]

Doctor Know-All


Once upon a time a poor Peasant, named Crabb, was taking a load of
wood drawn by two oxen to the town for sale. He sold it to a Doctor
for four thalers. When the money was being paid to him, it so happened
that the Doctor was sitting at dinner. When the Peasant saw how
daintily the Doctor was eating and drinking, he felt a great desire to
become a Doctor too. He remained standing and looking on for a time,
and then asked if he could not be a Doctor.

'Oh yes!' said the Doctor; 'that is easily managed.'

'What must I do?' asked the Peasant.

'First buy an ABC book; you can get one with a cock as a frontispiece.
Secondly, turn your wagon and oxen into money, and buy with it clothes
and other things suitable for a Doctor. Thirdly, have a sign painted
with the words, "I am Doctor Know-all," and have it nailed over your
door.'

The Peasant did everything that he was told to do.

Now when he had been doctoring for a while, not very long though, a
rich nobleman had some money stolen from him. He was told about Doctor
Know-all, who lived in such and such a village, who would be sure to
know what had become of it. So the gentleman ordered his carriage and
drove to the village.

He stopped at the Doctor's house, and asked Crabb if he were Doctor
Know-all.

'Yes, I am.'

'Then you must go with me to get my stolen money back.'

'Yes, certainly; but Grethe, my wife, must come too.'

The nobleman agreed, and gave both of them seats in his carriage, and
they all drove off together.

When they reached the nobleman's castle the dinner was ready, and
Crabb was invited to sit down to table.

'Yes; but Grethe, my wife, must dine too'; and he seated himself with
her.

When the first Servant brought in a dish of choice food, the Peasant
nudged his wife, and said: 'Grethe, that was the first,'--meaning that
the servant was handing the first dish. But the servant thought he
meant, 'That was the first thief.' As he really was the thief, he
became much alarmed, and said to his comrades outside--

'That Doctor knows everything, we shan't get out of this hole; he said
I was the first.'

The second Servant did not want to go in at all, but he had to go, and
when he offered his dish to the Peasant he nudged his wife, and
said--'Grethe, that is the second.'

This Servant also was frightened and hurried out.

The third one fared no better. The Peasant said again: 'Grethe, that
is the third.'

The fourth one brought in a covered dish, and the master told the
Doctor that he must show his powers and guess what was under the
cover. Now it was a dish of crabs.

The Peasant looked at the dish and did not know what to do, so he
said: 'Wretched Crabb that I am.'

When the Master heard him he cried: 'There, he knows it! Then he knows
where the money is too.'

Then the Servant grew terribly frightened, and signed to the Doctor to
come outside.

When he went out, they all four confessed to him that they had stolen
the money; they would gladly give it to him and a large sum in
addition, if only he would not betray them to their Master, or their
necks would be in peril. They also showed him where the money was
hidden. Then the Doctor was satisfied, went back to the table, and
said--

'Now, Sir, I will look in my book to see where the money is hidden.'

The fifth, in the meantime, had crept into the stove to hear if the
Doctor knew still more. But he sat there turning over the pages of his
ABC book looking for the cock, and as he could not find it at once, he
said: 'I know you are there, and out you must come.'

The man in the stove thought it was meant for him, and sprang out in a
fright, crying: 'The man knows everything.'

Then Doctor Know-all showed the nobleman where the money was hidden,
but he did not betray the servants; and he received much money from
both sides as a reward, and became a very celebrated man.




The Seven Ravens


There was once a Man who had seven sons, but never a daughter, however
much he wished for one.

At last, however, he had a daughter.

His joy was great, but the child was small and delicate, and, on
account of its weakness, it was to be christened at home.

The Father sent one of his sons in haste to the spring to fetch some
water; the other six ran with him, and because each of them wanted to
be the first to draw the water, between them the pitcher fell into the
brook.

There they stood and didn't know what to do, and not one of them
ventured to go home.

As they did not come back, their Father became impatient, and said:
'Perhaps the young rascals are playing about, and have forgotten it
altogether.'

He became anxious lest his little girl should die unbaptized, and in
hot vexation, he cried: 'I wish the youngsters would all turn into
Ravens!'

Scarcely were the words uttered, when he heard a whirring in the air
above his head, and, looking upwards, he saw seven coal-black Ravens
flying away.

The parents could not undo the spell, and were very sad about the loss
of their seven sons, but they consoled themselves in some measure with
their dear little daughter, who soon became strong, and every day more
beautiful.

For a long time she was unaware that she had had any brothers, for her
parents took care not to mention it.

However, one day by chance she heard some people saying about her: 'Oh
yes, the girl's pretty enough; but you know she is really to blame for
the misfortune to her seven brothers.'

  [Illustration: {The good little Sister cut off her own tiny finger,
    fitted it into the lock, and succeeded in opening it.}]

Then she became very sad, and went to her father and mother and asked
if she had ever had any brothers, and what had become of them.

The parents could no longer conceal the secret. They said, however,
that what had happened was by the decree of heaven, and that her birth
was merely the innocent occasion.

But the little girl could not get the matter off her conscience for a
single day, and thought that she was bound to release her brothers
again. She had no peace or quiet until she had secretly set out, and
gone forth into the wide world to trace her brothers, wherever they
might be, and to free them, let it cost what it might.

She took nothing with her but a little ring as a remembrance of her
parents, a loaf of bread against hunger, a pitcher of water against
thirst, and a little chair in case of fatigue. She kept ever going on
and on until she came to the end of the world.

Then she came to the Sun, but it was hot and terrible, it devoured
little children. She ran hastily away to the Moon, but it was too
cold, and, moreover, dismal and dreary. And when the child was looking
at it, it said: 'I smell, I smell man's flesh!'

Then she quickly made off, and came to the Stars, and they were kind
and good, and every one sat on his own special seat.

But the Morning Star stood up, and gave her a little bone, and said:
'Unless you have this bone, you cannot open the glass mountain, and in
the glass mountain are your brothers.'

The girl took the bone, and wrapped it up carefully in a little
kerchief, and went on again until she came to the glass mountain.

The gate was closed, and she meant to get out the little bone. But
when she undid the kerchief it was empty, and she had lost the good
Star's present.

How, now, was she to set to work? She was determined to rescue her
brothers, but had no key to open the glass mountain.

The good little sister took a knife and cut off her own tiny finger,
fitted it into the keyhole, and succeeded in opening the lock.

When she had entered, she met a Dwarf, who said: 'My child, what are
you looking for?'

'I am looking for my brothers, the Seven Ravens,' she answered.

The Dwarf said: 'My masters, the Ravens, are not at home; but if you
like to wait until they come, please to walk in.'

Thereupon the Dwarf brought in the Ravens' supper, on seven little
plates, and in seven little cups, and the little sister ate a crumb or
two from each of the little plates, and took a sip from each of the
little cups, but she let the ring she had brought with her fall into
the last little cup.

All at once a whirring and crying were heard in the air; then the
Dwarf said: 'Now my masters the Ravens are coming home.'

Then they came in, and wanted to eat and drink, and began to look
about for their little plates and cups.

But they said one after another: 'Halloa! who has been eating off my
plate? Who has been drinking out of my cup? There has been some human
mouth here.'

  [Illustration: When she entered she met a Dwarf.]

And when the seventh drank to the bottom of his cup, the ring rolled
up against his lips.

He looked at it, and recognised it as a ring belonging to his father
and mother, and said: 'God grant that our sister may be here, and that
we may be delivered.'

  [Illustration: {But they said one after another: 'Halloa! who has
    been eating off my plate? Who has been drinking out of my cup?'}]

As the maiden was standing behind the door listening, she heard the
wish and came forward, and then all the Ravens got back their human
form again.

And they embraced and kissed one another, and went joyfully home.

  [Illustration: The Ravens coming home.]




The Marriage of Mrs. Reynard


There was once an old Fox who thought that his wife was not true to
him, and determined to put her to the test. He stretched himself under
the bank, lay motionless, and pretended to be as dead as a door nail.
Mrs. Reynard went to her chamber, and shut herself in; and her
servant, Mistress Cat, sat by the fire, and cooked the dinner.

Now, when it became known that the old Fox was dead, suitors began to
announce themselves. Soon afterwards, the servant heard some one
knocking at the front door. She went and opened the door, and there
stood a young Fox, who said--

    'What are ye doing, pray, Mistress Cat?
    Sleeping or waking? or what are ye at?'

She answered--

    'I'm not asleep; I'm wide awake.
    D'ye want to know what now I make?
    I'm warming beer, with butter in it;
    I beg ye'll taste it in a minute.'

'I'm much obliged, Mistress,' said the Fox. 'What is Mrs. Reynard
doing?'

The Maid answered--

    'In chamber sad she sits alone,
    And ceases not with grief to moan.
    She weeps until her eyes are red,
    Because the dear old Fox is dead.'

'Well, just tell her, Mistress, that there's a young Fox here, who
would be glad to woo her.'

'Very well, young gentleman.'

    'Then went the Cat with pit-a-pat
    And smote the door, rat-tata-tat!
    "Pray, Mrs. Reynard, are you in?
    Outside a wooer waits below!"'

'Well, what's he like? I want to know. Has he got nine such beautiful
tails as the late lamented Mr. Reynard?'

'Oh dear no,' answered the Cat. 'He has only got one.'

'Then I won't have him.'

Mistress Cat went down, and sent the wooer away.

Soon after this there was knocking again, and another Fox appeared at
the door, who wished to pay his addresses to Mrs. Reynard. He had two
tails, but he came off no better than the first. Afterwards others
came, each with one tail more; but they were all rejected, till at
last one came that had nine tails like old Mr. Reynard.

When the widow heard this, full of joy, she said to the Cat--

    'Open the gates and doors; be swift.
    Old Mr. Reynard turn adrift.'

But when the wedding was about to be celebrated, then old Mr. Reynard
under the bank roused himself, and gave the whole crew a good
drubbing, and sent them, Mrs. Reynard and all, helter-skelter out of
the house.


Second Tale

When old Mr. Reynard really died, the Wolf came as a suitor, and
knocked at the door, and the Cat who acted as servant to Mrs. Reynard,
opened it.

The Wolf greeted her, and said--

    'Good-day, Miss Cat, of sprightly wit,
    How comes it that alone you sit?
    What are you making there, so good?'

The Cat answered--

    'Tumbling milk and butter up.
    Will your Lordship have a sup?'

'Thank you kindly, Mistress Cat. Mistress Reynard is not at home, I
suppose.'

    'Upstairs in her chamber she sits,
    And weeps as her sorrow befits.
    Her sad case she doth much deplore,
    Because Mr. Reynard's no more.'

The Wolf answered--

    '"If now she wants to wed again,
    She must come down the stairs, 'tis plain."
    The Cat ran up without delay,
    Nor did her claws their clatter stay
    Until she reached the long saloon.
    There, tapping with her five gold rings,
    "Is Mrs. Reynard in?" she sings.
    "If now she wants to wed again,
    She must come down the stairs, 'tis plain."'

Mrs. Reynard asked: 'Does the gentleman wear red breeches, and has he
a pointed muzzle?'

'No,' answered the Cat.

'Then he is no use to me.'

When the Wolf was rejected, there came a Dog, a Stag, a Hare, a Bear,
and one after another every sort of wild animal. But in every one
there was wanting some of the good qualities which old Mr. Reynard had
possessed, and the Cat was obliged to dismiss the suitors every time.
At last there came a young Fox. Then Mrs. Reynard asked: 'Does the
gentleman wear red breeches, and has he got a pointed muzzle?'

'Yes,' said the Cat. 'He has both.'

'Then let him come up,' said Mrs. Reynard, and ordered the maid to
make ready the wedding feast.

    'Now, Cat, set to and sweep the room.
    Then fling the old Fox from the house;
    Bring in many a good fat mouse,
    But eat them all yourself alone,
    Nor give your mistress e'er a one.'

Then the wedding with young Mr. Fox was held, and there was
merry-making and dancing, and if they haven't stopped, they are
dancing still.

  [Illustration: Does the gentleman wear red breeches, and has he a
    pointed muzzle?]




The Salad


There was once a merry young Huntsman, who went into the forest to
hunt. He was gay and light-hearted, and whistled a tune upon a leaf as
he went along.

Suddenly an ugly old Crone spoke to him, and said: 'Good morning, dear
Huntsman; you are merry and happy enough, while I am hungry and
thirsty. Pray give me an alms.'

The Huntsman pitied the poor Old Woman, put his hand in his pocket,
and made her a present according to his means.

Then he wanted to go on. But the Old Woman held him back, and said:
'Hark ye, dear Huntsman, I will make you a present because of your
good heart. Go on your way, and you will come to a tree, on which nine
birds are sitting. They will have a cloak in their claws, over which
they are fighting. Take aim with your gun, and shoot into the middle
of them. They will drop the cloak, and one of the birds will fall down
dead. Take the cloak with you, it is a wishing-cloak. When you throw
it round your shoulders you only have to wish yourself at a place to
be there at once. Take the heart out of the dead bird and swallow it
whole, then you will find a gold coin under your pillow every single
morning when you wake.'

The Huntsman thanked the Wise Woman, and thought: 'She promises fine
things, if only they turn out as well.'

When he had gone about a hundred paces, he heard above him, in the
branches of a tree, such a chattering and screaming that he looked up.

There he saw a flock of birds tearing a garment with their beaks and
claws; snatching and tearing at it as if each one wanted to have it
for himself.

'Well,' said the Huntsman, 'this is extraordinary, it is exactly what
the Old Woman said.'

He put his gun to his shoulder, took aim and fired right into the
middle of them, making the feathers fly about.

The birds took flight with a great noise, all except one, which fell
down dead, and the cloak dropped at his feet.

He did as the Old Woman had told him, cut the heart out of the bird
and swallowed it whole. Then he took the cloak home with him.

When he woke in the morning, he remembered the Old Woman's promise,
and looked under his pillow to see if it was true.

There, sure enough, lay the golden coin shining before him, and the
next morning he found another, and the same every morning when he got
up.

He collected quite a heap of gold, and at last he thought: 'What is
the good of all my gold if I stay at home here? I will go and look
about me in the world.'

So he took leave of his parents, shouldered his gun, and started off
into the world.

  [Illustration: But the Old Woman was a witch.]

It so happened that one day he came to a thick forest, and when he got
through it, he saw a fine castle lying in the plain beyond.

He saw an Old Woman standing in one of the windows looking out, with a
beautiful Maiden beside her.

But the Old Woman was a witch, and she said to the Maiden: 'Here comes
some one out of the forest. He has a wonderful treasure inside him; we
must try to get it from him, my darling, it will suit us better than
him. He has a bird's heart about him, and therefore he finds a gold
coin every morning under his pillow when he wakes.'

She told the girl how he had got it, and at last said: 'If you don't
get it from him, it will be the worse for you.'

When the Huntsman got nearer, he saw the Maiden, and said: 'I have
been wandering about for a long time, I will go into this castle and
take a rest. I have plenty of money.'

But the real reason was that he had caught sight of the pretty picture
at the window. He went in, and he was kindly received and hospitably
treated.

Before long, he was so enamoured of the Witch-Maiden that he thought
of nothing else, and cared for nothing but pleasing her.

The Old Woman said to the Maiden: 'Now we must get the bird's heart,
he will never miss it.'

They concocted a potion, and when it was ready they put it into a
goblet.

And the Maiden took it to him, and said: 'Now, my beloved, you must
drink to me.'

He took the cup and drank the potion, and when he was overpowered by
it the bird's heart came out of his mouth.

The Maiden took it away secretly and swallowed it herself, for the Old
Woman wanted to have it.

From this time the Huntsman found no more gold under his pillow; but
the coin was always under the Maiden's instead, and the Old Woman used
to fetch it away every morning.

But he was so much in love, that he thought of nothing but enjoying
himself in the Maiden's company.

Then the Old Woman said: 'We have got the bird's heart, but we must
have his wishing-cloak too.'

The Maiden said: 'Let us leave him that; we have taken away his
wealth.'

The Old Woman was very angry, and said: 'A cloak like that is a very
wonderful thing, and not often to be got. Have it I must, and will!'

So she obeyed the Witch's orders, placed herself at the window, and
looked sadly out at the distant hills.

The Huntsman said: 'Why are you so sad?'

'Alas! my love,' was her answer, 'over there are the garnet
mountains, where the precious stones are found. I long for them so
much that I grow sad whenever I think of them. But who could ever get
them? The birds which fly, perhaps; no mortal could ever reach them.'

'If that is all your trouble,' said the Huntsman, 'I can soon lift
that load from your heart.'

Then he drew her under his cloak, and in a moment they were both
sitting on the mountain. The precious stones were glittering around
them; their hearts rejoiced at the sight of them, and they soon
gathered together some of the finest and largest.

Now the Witch had so managed that the Huntsman began to feel his eyes
grow very heavy.

So he said to the Maiden: 'We will sit down to rest a while, I am so
tired I can hardly stand.'

So they sat down, and he laid his head on her lap and was soon fast
asleep.

As soon as he was asleep, the Maiden slipped the cloak from his
shoulders and put it on her own, loaded herself with the precious
garnets, and wished herself at home.

When the Huntsman had had his sleep out, he woke up and saw that his
beloved had betrayed him, and left him alone on the wild mountain.

'Oh, what treachery there is in the world!' he exclaimed, as he sat
down in grief, and did not know what to do.

Now the mountain belonged to some wild and savage Giants who lived on
it, and before long he saw three of them striding along.

He quickly lay down again and pretended to be fast asleep.

The first one, as he came along, stumbled against him, and said: 'What
kind of earthworm is this?'

The second said: 'Tread on him and kill him.'

But the third said: 'It isn't worth the trouble. Let him alone,--he
can't live here; and when he climbs higher up the mountain, the clouds
will roll down and carry him off.'

Then they passed on, and as soon as they were gone, the Huntsman, who
had heard all they said, got up and climbed up to the top of the
mountain.

After he had sat there for a time, a cloud floated over him, and
carried him away.

At first he was swept through the air, but then he was gently lowered
and deposited within a large walled garden, upon a soft bed of
lettuces and other herbs.

He looked around him and said: 'If only I had something to eat; I am
so hungry. And it will be difficult to get away from here. I see
neither apples nor pears, nor any other fruit, nothing but salad and
herbs.'

At last, however, he thought: 'At the worst, I can eat some of this
salad; it does not taste very good, but it will, at least, be
refreshing.'

He picked out a fine head of lettuce, and began eating it. But he had
hardly swallowed a little piece, when he began to feel very odd, and
quite changed. He felt four legs growing, a big head, and two long
ears, and he saw to his horror that he was changed into an ass.

As he at the same time felt as hungry as ever, and the juicy salad was
now very much to his taste, he went on eating greedily.

At last he reached another kind of salad, which he had hardly tasted
when he felt a new change taking place, and found himself back in his
human shape.

After this he lay down and slept off his fatigue.

When he woke next morning he broke off a head of the bad salad, and a
head of the good, and thought: 'These will help me to regain my own,
and also to punish the traitors.'

He put the salad into his wallet, climbed over the wall, and went off
to find the castle of his beloved.

After wandering about for a few days, he was fortunate enough to find
it. Then he stained his face, and disguised himself so that his own
mother would not have known him, and went to the castle to ask for
shelter.

'I am so tired,' he said; 'I cannot go any further.'

The Witch said: 'Who are you, countryman, and what do you want?'

He answered: 'I am a messenger from the King. He sent me to find the
rarest salad which grows under the sun. I have been lucky enough to
find it, and I carry it with me. But the sun is so burning, that I am
afraid the tender plant will be withered, and I don't know if I shall
be able to take it any further.'

When the Old Witch heard about the rare salad, she felt a great desire
to have some, and said: 'Good countryman, let me try the wonderful
salad!'

'By all means,' he answered. 'I have two heads with me, and you shall
have one.' So saying, he opened his sack, and handed her the bad one.

The Witch had no suspicions, and her mouth so watered for the new
dish, that she went to the kitchen herself to prepare it.

When it was ready, she could not wait till it was put upon the table,
but put a few leaves into her mouth at once.

Hardly had she swallowed them, when she lost her human shape, and ran
out into the courtyard, as an old she-ass.

Then the Maid came into the kitchen, saw the salad standing ready, and
was about to put it on the table. But on the way the fancy seized her
to taste it, according to her usual habit, and she ate a few leaves.

The power of the salad at once became apparent, because she also
turned into an ass, and ran out into the yard to join the Old Witch,
while the dish of salad fell to the ground.

In the meantime the messenger was sitting with the beautiful Maiden,
and as no one appeared with the salad, she also was seized with a
desire to taste it, and said: 'I don't know what has become of the
salad.'

But the Huntsman thought: 'The plant must have done its work,' and
said: 'I will go into the kitchen and see.'

As soon as he got downstairs he saw the two asses running about, and
the salad lying on the ground.

'This is all right!' he said; 'two of them are done for.'

Then he picked up the leaves, put them on a dish, and took them to the
Maiden.

'I am bringing the precious food to you myself,' said he, 'so that you
may not have to wait any longer.'

She ate some, and, like the others, was immediately changed into an
ass, and ran out to them in the yard.

  [Illustration: He tied them all together and drove them along till
    he came to a mill.]

When the Huntsman had washed his face so that the transformed
creatures might know him, he went into the courtyard, and said: 'Now,
you shall be paid for your treachery.'

He tied them all together with a rope, and drove them along till he
came to a mill. He tapped at the window, and the Miller put his head
out and asked what he wanted.

'I have three bad animals here,' he said, 'that I want to get rid of.
If you will take them and feed them, and treat them as I wish, I will
pay you what you like to ask.'

'Why not?' said the Miller. 'How do you want them treated?'

The Huntsman said he wanted the old she-ass (the Witch) to be well
beaten three times a day and fed once. The younger one, which was the
Maid, beaten once and fed three times. The youngest of all, who was
the beautiful Maiden, was to be fed three times, and not beaten at
all; he could not find it in his heart to have her beaten.

Then he went back to the castle and found everything he wanted in it.

A few days later the Miller came and told him that the old ass which
was to be beaten three times and fed once, was dead. 'The other two,'
he said, 'which are to be fed three times, are not dead, but they are
pining away, and won't last long.'

The Huntsman's heart was stirred with pity, and he told the Miller to
bring them back to him.

When they came he gave them some of the other salad to eat, so that
they took their human shapes again.

The beautiful Maiden fell on her knees before him, and said: 'O my
beloved, forgive me all the wrong I have done you. My mother forced me
to do it. It was against my own will, for I love you dearly. Your
wishing-cloak is hanging in the cupboard, and you shall have the
bird's heart back too.'

But he said: 'Keep it; it will be all the same, as I will take you to
be my own true wife.'

Their marriage was soon after celebrated, and they lived happily
together till they died.




The Youth who could not Shudder


There was once a Father who had two sons. One was clever and sensible,
and always knew how to get on. But the younger one was stupid, and
could not learn anything, and he had no imagination.

When people saw him, they said: 'His Father will have plenty of
trouble with him.'

Whenever there was anything to be done, the eldest one always had to
do it. But if his Father sent him to fetch anything late in the
evening, or at night, and the way lay through the churchyard, or any
other dreary place, he would answer: 'Oh no, Father, not there; it
makes me shudder!' For he was afraid.

In the evening, when stories were being told round the fire which made
one's flesh creep, and the listeners said: 'Oh, you make me shudder!'
the youngest son, sitting in the corner listening, could not imagine
what they meant. 'They always say "It makes me shudder! It makes me
shudder!" And it doesn't make me shudder a bit. It must be some art
which I can't understand.'

Now it happened one day that his Father said to him: 'I say, you in
the corner there, you are growing big and strong. You must learn
something by which you can make a living. See what pains your brother
takes, but you are not worth your salt.'

'Well, Father,' he answered, 'I am quite ready to learn something;
nay, I should very much like to learn how to shudder, for I know
nothing about that.'

The elder son laughed when he heard him, and thought: 'Good heavens!
what a fool my brother is; he will never do any good as long as he
lives.'

But his Father sighed, and answered: 'You will easily enough learn how
to shudder, but you won't make your bread by it.'

Soon after, the Sexton came to the house on a visit, and the Father
confided his troubles about his son to him. He told him how stupid he
was, and how he never could learn anything. 'Would you believe that
when I asked him how he was going to make his living, he said he would
like to learn how to shudder?'

'If that's all,' said the Sexton, 'he may learn that from me. Just let
me have him, and I'll soon put the polish on him.'

The Father was pleased, for he thought: 'Anyhow, the Lad will gain
something by it.'

So the Sexton took him home with him, and he had to ring the church
bells.

A few days after, the Sexton woke him at midnight, and told him to get
up and ring the bells. 'You shall soon be taught how to shudder!' he
thought, as he crept stealthily up the stairs beforehand.

When the Lad got up into the tower, and turned round to catch hold of
the bell rope, he saw a white figure standing on the steps opposite
the belfry window.

'Who is there?' he cried; but the figure neither moved nor answered.

'Answer,' cried the Lad, 'or get out of the way. You have no business
here in the night.'

But so that the Lad should think he was a ghost, the Sexton did not
stir.

The Lad cried for the second time: 'What do you want here? Speak if
you are an honest fellow, or I'll throw you down the stairs.'

The Sexton did not think he would go to such lengths, so he made no
sound, and stood as still as if he were made of stone.

Then the Lad called to him the third time, and, as he had no answer,
he took a run and threw the ghost down the stairs. It fell down ten
steps, and remained lying in a corner.

Then he rang the bells, went home, and, without saying a word to
anybody, went to bed and was soon fast asleep.

The Sexton's wife waited a long time for her husband, but, as he never
came back, she got frightened, and woke up the Lad.

'Don't you know what has become of my husband?' she asked. 'He went up
into the church tower before you.'

'No,' answered the Lad. 'There was somebody standing on the stairs
opposite the belfry window, and, as he would neither answer me nor go
away, I took him to be a rogue and threw him downstairs. Go and see if
it was your husband; I should be sorry if it were.'

The woman hurried away and found her husband lying in the corner,
moaning, with a broken leg. She carried him down, and then hastened
with loud cries to the Lad's father.

'Your son has brought about a great misfortune; he has thrown my
husband downstairs and broken his leg. Take the good-for-nothing
fellow away, out of our house.'

The Father was horrified, and, going back with her, gave the Lad a
good scolding.

'What is the meaning of this inhuman prank? The evil one must have put
it into your head.'

'Father,' answered the Lad, 'just listen to me. I am quite innocent.
He stood there in the dark, like a man with some wicked design. I did
not know who it was, and I warned him three times to speak, or to go
away!'

'Alas!' said his Father, 'you bring me nothing but disaster. Go away
out of my sight. I will have nothing more to do with you.'

'Gladly, Father. Only wait till daylight; then I will go away, and
learn to shudder. Then, at least, I shall have one art to make my
living by.'

'Learn what you like,' said his Father. 'It's all the same to me. Here
are fifty thalers for you. Go out into the world, and don't tell a
creature where you come from, or who your Father is, for you will only
bring me to shame.'

'Just as you please, Father. If that is all you want, I can easily
fulfil your desire.'

At daybreak, the Lad put his fifty thalers into his pocket, and went
out along the high road, repeating over and over to himself as he
went: 'If only I could shudder, if only I could shudder.'

A Man came by and overheard the words the Lad was saying to himself,
and when they had gone a little further, and came within sight of the
gallows, he said: 'See, there is the tree where those seven have been
wedded to the ropemaker's daughter, and are now learning to fly. Sit
down below them, and when night comes you will soon learn to shudder.'

'If nothing more than that is needed,' said the Lad, 'it is easily
done. And if I learn to shudder as easily as that, you shall have my
fifty thalers. Come back to me early to-morrow morning.'

Then the Lad went up to the gallows, and sat down under them to wait
till night came.

As he was cold he lighted a fire, but at midnight the wind grew so
cold that he did not know how to keep himself warm.

The wind blew the men on the gallows backwards and forwards, and swung
them against each other, so he thought: 'Here am I freezing by the
fire, how much colder they must be up there.'

And as he was very compassionate, he mounted the ladder, undid them,
and brought all seven down one by one.

Then he blew up the fire, and placed them round it to warm themselves.

They sat there and never moved, even when the fire caught their
clothing.

'Take care, or I will hang you all up again.'

The dead men, of course, could not hear, and remained silent while
their few rags were burnt up.

Then he grew angry, and said: 'If you won't take care of yourselves,
I can't help you, and I won't be burnt with you.'

So he hung them all up again in a row, and sat down by the fire and
went to sleep again.

Next morning, the Man, wanting to get his fifty thalers, came to him
and said: 'Now do you know what shuddering means?'

'No,' he said; 'how should I have learnt it? Those fellows up there
never opened their mouths, and they were so stupid that they let the
few poor rags they had about them burn.'

Then the Man saw that no thalers would be his that day, and he went
away, saying: 'Never in my life have I seen such a fellow as this.'

The Lad also went on his way, and again began saying to himself: 'Oh,
if only I could learn to shudder, if only I could learn to shudder.'

A Carter, walking behind him, heard this, and asked: 'Who are you?'

'I don't know,' answered the Youth.

'Who is your Father?'

'That I must not say.'

'What are you always mumbling in your beard?'

'Ah,' answered the Youth, 'I want to learn to shudder, but no one can
teach me.'

'Stop your silly chatter,' said the Carter. 'Just you come with me,
and I'll see that you have what you want.'

The Youth went with the Carter, and in the evening they reached an
inn, where they meant to pass the night. He said quite loud, as they
entered: 'Oh, if only I could learn to shudder, if only I could learn
to shudder.'

The Landlord, who heard him, laughed, and said: 'If that's what you
want, there should be plenty of opportunity for you here.'

'I will have nothing to say to it,' said the Landlady. 'So many a
prying fellow has already paid the penalty with his life. It would be
a sin and a shame if those bright eyes should not see the light of day
again.'

But the Youth said: 'I will learn it somehow, however hard it may be.
I have been driven out for not knowing it.'

He gave the Landlord no peace till he told him that there was an
enchanted castle a little way off, where any one could be made to
shudder, if he would pass three nights in it.

The King had promised his daughter to wife to any one who dared do it,
and she was the prettiest maiden the sun had ever shone on.

There were also great treasures hidden in the castle, watched over by
evil spirits, enough to make any poor man rich who could break the
spell.

Already many had gone in, but none had ever come out.

Next morning the Youth went to the King, and said: 'By your leave, I
should like to pass three nights in the enchanted castle.'

The King looked at him, and, as he took a fancy to him, he said: 'You
may ask three things to take into the castle with you, but they must
be lifeless things.'

He answered: 'Then I ask for a fire, a turning-lathe, and a cooper's
bench with the knife.'

The King had all three carried into the castle for him.

When night fell, the Youth went up to the castle and made a bright
fire in one of the rooms. He put the cooper's bench with the knife
near the fire, and seated himself on the turning-lathe.

'Oh, if only I could shudder,' he said; 'but I shan't learn it here
either.'

Towards midnight he wanted to make up the fire, and, as he was blowing
it up, something in one corner began to shriek: 'Miau, miau, how cold
we are!'

'You fools!' he cried. 'What do you shriek for? If you are cold, come
and warm yourselves by the fire.'

As he spoke, two big black cats bounded up and sat down, one on each
side of him, and stared at him with wild, fiery eyes.

After a time, when they had warmed themselves, they said: 'Comrade,
shall we have a game of cards?'

'Why not?' he answered; 'but show me your paws first.'

Then they stretched out their claws.

'Why,' he said, 'what long nails you've got. Wait a bit; I must cut
them for you.'

He seized them by the scruff of their necks, lifted them on to the
cooper's bench, and screwed their paws firmly to it.

  [Illustration: Crowds of black cats and dogs swarmed out of every
    corner.]

'I have looked at your fingers, and the desire to play cards with you
has passed.'

Then he killed them and threw them out into the moat.

But no sooner had he got rid of these two cats, and was about to sit
down by his fire again, than crowds of black cats and dogs swarmed out
of every corner, more and more of them.

They howled horribly, and trampled on his fire, and tried to put it
out.

For a time he looked quietly on, but when it grew too bad he seized
his cooper's knife, and cried: 'Away with you, you rascally pack,' and
let fly among them right and left. Some of them sprang away, the
others he killed, and threw them out into the water.

When he came back he scraped the embers of his fire together again,
and warmed himself. He could hardly keep his eyes open, and felt the
greatest desire to go to sleep. He looked round, and in one corner he
saw a big bed.

'That's the very thing,' he said, and lay down in it. As soon as he
closed his eyes, the bed began to move, and soon it was tearing round
and round the castle. 'Very good!' he said. 'The faster the better!'
The bed rolled on as if it were dragged by six horses; over thresholds
and stairs, up and down.

Suddenly it went hop, hop, hop, and turned topsy-turvy, so that it lay
upon him like a mountain. But he pitched the pillows and blankets into
the air, slipped out of it, and said: 'Now any one may ride who
likes.'

Then he lay down by his fire and slept till daylight.

In the morning the King came, and when he saw him lying on the floor,
he thought the ghosts had killed him, and he was dead. So he said:
'It's a sad pity, for such a handsome fellow.'

But the Youth heard him, and sat up, saying: 'It has not come to that
yet.'

The King was surprised and delighted, and asked him how he had got on.

'Pretty well!' he answered. 'One night is gone, I suppose I shall get
through the others too.'

When the Landlord saw him he opened his eyes, and said: 'I never
thought I should see you alive again. Have you learnt how to shudder
now?'

'No,' he answered; 'it's all in vain. If only some one would tell me
how.'

The second night came, and up he went again and sat down by the fire,
and began his old song: 'Oh, if only I could learn to shudder.'

In the middle of the night a great noise and uproar began, first soft,
and then growing louder; then for a short time there would be silence.

At last, with a loud scream, half the body of a man fell down the
chimney in front of him.

'Hullo!' he said, 'another half is wanting here; this is too little.'

The noise began again, and, amidst shrieks and howls, the other half
fell down.

'Wait a bit,' he said; 'I'll blow up the fire.'

When this was done, and he looked round, the two halves had come
together, and a hideous man sat in his place.

'We didn't bargain for that,' said the Youth. 'The bench is mine.'

The man wanted to push him out of the way, but the Youth would not
have it, flung him aside, and took his own seat.

Then more men fell down the chimney, one after the other, and they
fetched nine human shin bones and two skulls, and began to play
skittles.

The Youth felt inclined to join them, and cried: 'I say, can I play
too?'

'Yes, if you've got any money.'

'Money enough,' he answered, 'but your balls aren't quite round.'

Then he took the skulls and turned them on the lathe till they were
quite round. 'Now they will roll better,' he said. 'Here goes! The
more, the merrier!'

So he played with them, and lost some money, but when it struck
twelve everything disappeared. He lay down, and was soon fast asleep.

Next morning the King came again to look after him, and said: 'Well,
how did you get on this time?'

'I played skittles,' he answered, 'and lost a few coins.'

'Didn't you learn to shudder?'

'Not I. I only made merry. Oh, if I could but find out how to
shudder.'

On the third night he again sat down on his bench, and said quite
savagely: 'If only I could shudder!'

When it grew late, six tall men came in, carrying a bier, and he said:
'Hullo there! That must be my cousin who died a few days ago.' And he
beckoned and said: 'Come along, cousin, come along.'

The men put the coffin on the floor, and he went up and took the lid
off, and there lay a dead man. He felt the face, and it was as cold
as ice. 'Wait,' he said; 'I will warm him.'

Then he went to the fire and warmed his hand, and laid it on his face,
but the dead man remained cold. He took him out of the coffin, sat
down by the fire, and took him on his knees, and rubbed his arms to
make the blood circulate.

But it was all no good. Next, it came into his head that if two people
were in bed together, they warmed each other. So he put the dead man
in the bed, covered him up, and lay down beside him.

After a time the dead man grew warm, and began to move.

Then the Youth said: 'There, you see, cousin mine, have I not warmed
you?'

But the Man rose up, and cried: 'Now, I will strangle you!'

'What!' said he, 'are those all the thanks I get? Back you go into
your coffin then.' So saying, he lifted him up, threw him in, and
fastened down the lid. Then the six men came back and carried the
coffin away.

'I cannot shudder,' he said; 'and I shall never learn it here.'

Just then a huge Man appeared. He was frightful to look at, old, and
with a long white beard.

'Oh, you miserable wight!' he cried. 'You shall soon learn what
shuddering is, for you shall die.'

'Not so fast,' said the Youth. 'If I am to die, I must be present.'

'I will make short work of you,' said the old monster.

'Softly! softly! don't you boast. I am as strong as you, and very
likely much stronger.'

'We shall see about that,' said the Old Man. 'If you are the stronger,
I will let you go. Come; we will try.'

Then he led him through numberless dark passages to a smithy, took an
axe, and with one blow struck one of the anvils into the earth.

'I can better that,' said the Youth, and went to the other anvil. The
Old Man placed himself near to see, and his white beard hung over.

Then the Youth took the axe and split the anvil with one blow,
catching in the Old Man's beard at the same time.

'Now, I have you fast,' said the Youth, 'and you will be the one to
die.'

Then he seized an iron rod, and belaboured the Old Man with it, till
he shrieked for mercy, and promised him great riches if he would stop.

Then the Youth pulled out the axe and released him, and the Old Man
led him back into the castle, and showed him three chests of gold in a
cellar.

'One is for the poor,' he said, 'one for the King, and one for you.'

The clock struck twelve, and the ghost disappeared, leaving the Youth
in the dark.

'I must manage to get out somehow,' he said, and groped about till he
found his way back to his room, where he lay down by the fire and went
to sleep.

Next morning the King came and said: 'Now you must have learnt how to
shudder.'

  [Illustration: {Then the Youth took the axe and split the anvil with
    one blow, catching in the Old Man's beard at the same time.}]

'No,' said he. 'What can it be? My dead cousin was there, and an Old
Man with a beard came and showed me a lot of gold. But what shuddering
is, that no man can tell me.'

Then said the King: 'You have broken the spell on the castle, and you
shall marry my daughter.'

'That is all very well,' he said; 'but still I don't know what
shuddering is.'

The gold was got out of the castle, and the marriage was celebrated,
but, happy as the young King was, and much as he loved his wife, he
was always saying: 'Oh, if only I could learn to shudder, if only I
could learn to shudder.'

At last his wife was vexed by it, and her waiting-woman said: 'I can
help you; he shall be taught the meaning of shuddering.'

And she went out to the brook which ran through the garden and got a
pail full of cold water and little fishes.

At night, when the young King was asleep, his wife took the coverings
off and poured the cold water over him, and all the little fishes
flopped about him.

Then he woke up, and cried: 'Oh, how I am shuddering, dear wife, how I
am shuddering! Now I know what shuddering is!'




King Thrushbeard


There was once a King who had a Daughter. She was more beautiful than
words can tell, but at the same time so proud and haughty that no man
who came to woo her was good enough for her. She turned away one after
another, and even mocked them.

One day her father ordered a great feast to be given, and invited to
it all the marriageable young men from far and near.

They were all placed in a row, according to their rank and position.
First came Kings, then Princes, then Dukes, Earls, and Barons.

The Princess was led through the ranks, but she had some fault to find
with all of them.

One was too stout. 'That barrel!' she said. The next was too tall.
'Long and lean is no good!' The third was too short. 'Short and stout,
can't turn about!' The fourth was too white. 'Pale as death!' The
fifth was too red. 'Turkey-cock!' The sixth was not straight.
'Oven-dried!'

So there was something against each of them. But she made specially
merry over one good King, who stood quite at the head of the row, and
whose chin was a little hooked.

'Why!' she cried, 'he has a chin like the beak of a thrush.'

After that, he was always called 'King Thrushbeard.'

When the old King saw that his Daughter only made fun of them, and
despised all the suitors who were assembled, he was very angry, and
swore that the first beggar who came to the door should be her
husband.

A few days after, a wandering Musician began to sing at the window,
hoping to receive charity.

When the King heard him, he said: 'Let him be brought in.'

The Musician came in, dressed in dirty rags, and sang to the King and
his Daughter, and when he had finished, he begged alms of them.

The King said: 'Your song has pleased me so much, that I will give you
my Daughter to be your wife.'

The Princess was horror-stricken. But the King said: 'I have sworn an
oath to give you to the first beggar who came; and I will keep my
word.'

No entreaties were of any avail. A Parson was brought, and she had to
marry the Musician there and then.

When the marriage was completed, the King said: 'Now you are a
beggar-woman, you can't stay in my castle any longer. You must go away
with your Husband.'

The Beggar took her by the hand and led her away, and she was obliged
to go with him on foot.

When they came to a big wood, she asked:

    'Ah! who is the Lord of this forest so fine?'
    'It belongs to King Thrushbeard. It might have been thine,
    If his Queen you had been.'
    'Ah! sad must I sing!
    I would I'd accepted the hand of the King.'

After that they reached a great meadow, and she asked again:

    'Ah! who is the Lord of these meadows so fine?'
    'They belong to King Thrushbeard, and would have been thine,
    If his Queen you had been.'
    'Ah! sad must I sing!
    I would I'd accepted the love of the King.'

Then they passed through a large town, and again she asked:

    'Ah! who is the Lord of this city so fine?'
    'It belongs to King Thrushbeard, and it might have been thine,
    If his Queen you had been.'
    'Ah! sad must I sing!
    I would I'd accepted the heart of the King.'

'It doesn't please me at all,' said the Musician, 'that you are
always wishing for another husband. Am I not good enough for you?'

At last they came to a miserable little hovel, and she said:

    'Ah, heavens! what's this house, so mean and small?
    This wretched little hut's no house at all.'

The Musician answered: 'This is my house, and yours; where we are to
live together.'

The door was so low that she had to stoop to get in.

'Where are the servants?' asked the Princess.

'Servants indeed!' answered the Beggar. 'Whatever you want done, you
must do for yourself. Light the fire, and put the kettle on to make my
supper. I am very tired.'

But the Princess knew nothing about lighting fires or cooking, and to
get it done at all, the Beggar had to do it himself.

When they had finished their humble fare, they went to bed. But in the
morning the Man made her get up very early to do the housework.

They lived like this for a few days, till they had eaten up all their
store of food.

Then the Man said: 'Wife, this won't do any longer; we can't live here
without working. You shall make baskets.'

So he went out and cut some osiers, and brought them home. She began
to weave them, but the hard osiers bruised her tender hands.

'I see that won't do,' said the Beggar. 'You had better spin; perhaps
you can manage that.'

So she sat down and tried to spin, but the harsh yarn soon cut her
delicate fingers and made them bleed.

'Now you see,' said the Man, 'what a good-for-nothing you are. I have
made a bad bargain in you. But I will try to start a trade in
earthenware. You must sit in the market and offer your goods for
sale.'

  [Illustration: {The Beggar took her by the hand and led her away.}]

'Alas!' she thought, 'if any of the people from my father's kingdom
come and see me sitting in the market-place, offering goods for
sale, they will scoff at me.' But it was no good. She had to obey,
unless she meant to die of hunger.

All went well the first time. The people willingly bought her wares
because she was so handsome, and they paid what she asked them--nay,
some even gave her the money and left her the pots as well.

They lived on the gains as long as they lasted, and then the Man laid
in a new stock of wares.

She took her seat in a corner of the market, set out her crockery
about her, and began to cry her wares.

Suddenly, a drunken Hussar came galloping up, and rode right in among
the pots, breaking them into thousands of bits.

She began to cry, and was so frightened that she did not know what to
do. 'Oh! what will become of me?' she cried. 'What will my Husband say
to me?' She ran home, and told him her misfortune.

'Who would ever think of sitting at the corner of the market with
crockery?' he said. 'Stop that crying. I see you are no manner of use
for any decent kind of work. I have been to our King's palace, and
asked if they do not want a kitchen wench, and they have promised to
try you. You will get your victuals free, at any rate.'

So the Princess became a kitchen wench, and had to wait upon the Cook
and do all the dirty work. She fixed a pot into each of her pockets,
and in them took home her share of the scraps and leavings, and upon
these they lived.

It so happened that the marriage of the eldest Princess just then took
place, and the poor Woman went upstairs and stood behind the door to
peep at all the splendour.

When the rooms were lighted up, and she saw the guests streaming in,
one more beautiful than the other, and the scene grew more and more
brilliant, she thought, with a heavy heart, of her sad fate. She
cursed the pride and haughtiness which had been the cause of her
humiliation, and of her being brought to such depths.

Every now and then the Servants would throw her bits from the savoury
dishes they were carrying away from the feast, and these she put into
her pots to take home with her.

All at once the King's son came in. He was dressed in silk and velvet,
and he had a golden chain round his neck.

When he saw the beautiful Woman standing at the door, he seized her by
the hand, and wanted to dance with her.

But she shrank and refused, because she saw that it was King
Thrushbeard, who had been one of the suitors for her hand, and whom
she had most scornfully driven away.

Her resistance was no use, and he dragged her into the hall. The
string by which her pockets were suspended broke. Down fell the pots,
and the soup and savoury morsels were spilt all over the floor.

When the guests saw it, they burst into shouts of mocking laughter.

She was so ashamed, that she would gladly have sunk into the earth.
She rushed to the door, and tried to escape, but on the stairs a Man
stopped her and brought her back.

When she looked at him, it was no other than King Thrushbeard again.

He spoke kindly to her, and said: 'Do not be afraid. I and the
Beggar-Man, who lived in the poor little hovel with you, are one and
the same. For love of you I disguised myself; and I was also the
Hussar who rode among your pots. All this I did to bend your proud
spirit, and to punish you for the haughtiness with which you mocked
me.'

She wept bitterly, and said: 'I was very wicked, and I am not worthy
to be your wife.'

But he said: 'Be happy! Those evil days are over. Now we will
celebrate our true wedding.'

The waiting-women came and put rich clothing upon her, and her Father,
with all his Court, came and wished her joy on her marriage with King
Thrushbeard.

Then, in truth, her happiness began. I wish we had been there to see
it, you and I.




Iron Hans


There was once a King whose castle was surrounded by a forest full of
game. One day he sent a Huntsman out to shoot a deer, but he never
came back.

'Perhaps an accident has happened to him,' said the King.

Next day he sent out two more Huntsmen to look for him, but they did
not return either. On the third day he sent for all his Huntsmen, and
said to them, 'Search the whole forest without ceasing, until you have
found all three.'

But not a single man of all these, or one of the pack of hounds they
took with them, ever came back. From this time forth no one would
venture into the forest; so there it lay, wrapped in silence and
solitude, with only an occasional eagle or hawk circling over it.

This continued for several years, and then one day a strange Huntsman
sought an audience of the King, and offered to penetrate into the
dangerous wood. The King, however, would not give him permission, and
said, 'It's not safe, and I am afraid if you go in that you will never
come out again, any more than all the others.'

The Huntsman answered, 'Sire, I will take the risk upon myself. I do
not know fear.'

So the Huntsman went into the wood with his Dog. Before long the Dog
put up some game, and wanted to chase it; but hardly had he taken a
few steps when he came to a deep pool, and could go no further. A
naked arm appeared out of the water, seized him, and drew him down.

When the Huntsman saw this, he went back and fetched three men with
pails to empty the pool. When they got to the bottom they found a Wild
Man, whose body was as brown as rusty iron, and his hair hanging down
over his face to his knees. They bound him with cords, and carried
him away to the castle. There was great excitement over the Wild Man,
and the King had an iron cage made for him in the courtyard. He
forbade any one to open the door of the cage on pain of death, and the
Queen had to keep the key in her own charge.

After this, anybody could walk in the forest with safety.

The King had a little son eight years old, and one day he was playing
in the courtyard. In his play his golden ball fell into the cage. The
boy ran up, and said, 'Give me back my ball.'

'Not until you have opened the door,' said the Wild Man.

'No; I can't do that,' said the boy. 'My father has forbidden it,' and
then he ran away.

Next day he came again, and asked for his ball. The Man said, 'Open my
door'; but he would not.

On the third day the King went out hunting, and the boy came again,
and said, 'Even if I would, I could not open the door. I have not got
the key.'

Then the Wild Man said, 'It is lying under your mother's pillow. You
can easily get it.'

The boy, who was very anxious to have his ball back, threw his
scruples to the winds, and fetched the key. The door was very stiff,
and he pinched his fingers in opening it. As soon as it was open the
Wild Man came out, gave the boy his ball, and hurried away. The boy
was now very frightened, and cried out, 'O Wild Man, don't go away, or
I shall be beaten!'

The Wild Man turned back, picked up the boy, put him on his shoulder,
and walked hurriedly off into the wood.

When the King came home he saw at once the cage was empty, and asked
the Queen how it had come about. She knew nothing about it, and went
to look for the key, which was of course gone. They called the boy,
but there was no answer. The King sent people out into the fields to
look for him, but all in vain; he was gone. The King easily guessed
what had happened, and great grief fell on the royal household.

When the Wild Man got back into the depths of the dark forest he took
the boy down off his shoulder, and said, 'You will never see your
father and mother again; but I will keep you here with me, because you
had pity on me and set me free. If you do as you are told, you will be
well treated. I have treasures and gold enough and to spare, more than
anybody in the world.'

He made a bed of moss for the boy, on which he went to sleep. Next
morning the Man led him to a spring, and said, 'You see this golden
well is bright and clear as crystal? You must sit by it, and take care
that nothing falls into it, or it will be contaminated. I shall come
every evening to see if you have obeyed my orders.'

The boy sat down on the edge of the spring to watch it; sometimes he
would see a gold fish or a golden snake darting through it, and he
guarded it well, so that nothing should fall into it. One day as he
was sitting like this his finger pained him so much that involuntarily
he dipped it into the water. He drew it out very quickly, but saw that
it was gilded, and although he tried hard to clean it, it remained
golden. In the evening Iron Hans came back, looked at the boy, and
said, 'What has happened to the well to-day?'

'Nothing, nothing!' he answered, keeping his finger behind his back,
so that Iron Hans should not see it.

But he said, 'You have dipped your finger into the water. It does not
matter this time, but take care that nothing of the kind occurs
again.'

Early next morning the boy took his seat by the spring again to watch.
His finger still hurt very much, and he put his hand up above his
head; but, unfortunately, in so doing he brushed a hair into the well.
He quickly took it out, but it was already gilded. When Iron Hans came
in the evening, he knew very well what had happened.

'You have let a hair fall into the well,' he said. 'I will overlook it
once more, but if it happens for the third time, the well will be
polluted, and you can no longer stay with me.'

On the third day the boy again sat by the well; but he took good care
not to move a finger, however much it might hurt. The time seemed very
long to him as he looked at his face reflected in the water. As he
bent over further and further to look into his eyes, his long hair
fell over his shoulder right into the water. He started up at once,
but not before his whole head of hair had become golden, and glittered
like the sun. You may imagine how frightened the poor boy was. He took
his pocket-handkerchief and tied it over his head, so that Iron Hans
should not see it. But he knew all about it before he came, and at
once said, 'Take that handkerchief off your head,' and then all the
golden hair tumbled out. All the poor boy's excuses were no good. 'You
have not stood the test, and you can no longer stay here. You must go
out into the world, and there you will learn the meaning of poverty.
But as your heart is not bad, and as I wish you well, I will grant you
one thing. When you are in great need, go to the forest and cry "Iron
Hans," and I will come and help you. My power is great, greater than
you think, and I have gold and silver in abundance.'

So the King's son left the forest, and wandered over trodden and
untrodden paths till he reached a great city. He tried to get work,
but he could not find any; besides, he knew no trade by which to make
a living. At last he went to the castle and asked if they would employ
him. The courtiers did not know what use they could make of him, but
they were taken with his appearance, and said he might stay. At last
the Cook took him into his service, and said he might carry wood and
water for him, and sweep up the ashes.

One day, as there was no one else at hand, the Cook ordered him to
carry the food up to the royal table. As he did not want his golden
hair to be seen, he kept his cap on. Nothing of the sort had ever
happened in the presence of the King before, and he said, 'When you
come into the royal presence, you must take your cap off.'

'Alas, Sire,' he said, 'I cannot take it off, I have a bad wound on my
head.'

Then the King ordered the Cook to be called, and asked how he could
take such a boy into his service, and ordered him to be sent away at
once. But the Cook was sorry for him, and exchanged him with the
Gardener's boy.

Now the boy had to dig and hoe, plant and water, in every kind of
weather. One day in the summer, when he was working alone in the
garden, it was very hot, and he took off his cap for the fresh air to
cool his head. When the sun shone on his hair it glittered so that the
beams penetrated right into the Princess's bedroom, and she sprang up
to see what it was. She discovered the youth, and called to him,
'Bring me a nosegay, young man.'

He hurriedly put on his cap, picked a lot of wild flowers, and tied
them up. On his way up to the Princess, the Gardener met him, and
said, 'How can you take such poor flowers to the Princess? Quickly cut
another bouquet, and mind they are the choicest and rarest flowers.'

'Oh no,' said the youth. 'The wild flowers have a sweeter scent, and
will please her better.'

  [Illustration: She immediately clutched at his cap to pull it off;
    but he held it on with both hands.]

As soon as he went into the room the Princess said, 'Take off your
cap; it is not proper for you to wear it before me.'

He answered again, 'I may not take it off, because I have a wound on
my head.'

But she took hold of the cap, and pulled it off, and all his golden
hair tumbled over his shoulders in a shower. It was quite a sight. He
tried to get away, but she took hold of his arm, and gave him a
handful of ducats. He took them, but he cared nothing for the gold,
and gave it to the Gardener for his children to play with.

Next day the Princess again called him to bring her a bunch of wild
flowers, and when he brought it she immediately clutched at his cap to
pull it off; but he held it on with both hands. Again she gave him a
handful of ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave them to the
Gardener's children. The third day the same thing happened, but she
could not take off his cap, and he would not keep the gold.

Not long after this the kingdom was invaded. The King assembled his
warriors. He did not know whether they would be able to conquer his
enemies or not, as they were very powerful, and had a mighty army.
Then the Gardener's assistant said, 'I have been brought up to fight;
give me a horse, and I will go too.'

  [Illustration: He called three times, 'Iron Hans,' as loud as he
    could.]

The others laughed and said, 'When we are gone, find one for yourself.
We will leave one behind in the stable for you.'

When they were gone, he went and got the horse out; it was lame in one
leg, and hobbled along, humpety-hump, humpety-hump. Nevertheless, he
mounted it and rode away to the dark forest. When he came to the edge
of it, he called three times, 'Iron Hans,' as loud as he could, till
the trees resounded with it.

The Wild Man appeared immediately, and said, 'What do you want?'

'I want a strong horse to go to the war.'

'You shall have it, and more besides.'

The Wild Man went back into the wood, and before long a Groom came
out, leading a fiery charger with snorting nostrils. Behind him
followed a great body of warriors, all in armour, and their swords
gleaming in the sun. The youth handed over his three-legged steed to
the Groom, mounted the other, and rode away at the head of the troop.

When he approached the battle-field a great many of the King's men had
already fallen, and before long the rest must have given in. Then the
youth, at the head of his iron troop, charged, and bore down the enemy
like a mighty wind, smiting everything which came in their way. They
tried to fly, but the youth fell upon them, and did not stop while one
remained alive.

Instead of joining the King, he led his troop straight back to the
wood and called Iron Hans again.

'What do you want?' asked the Wild Man.

'Take back your charger and your troop, and give me back my
three-legged steed.'

His request was granted, and he rode his three-legged steed home.

When the King returned to the castle his daughter met him and
congratulated him on his victory.

'It was not I who won it,' he said; 'but a strange Knight, who came to
my assistance with his troop.' His daughter asked who the strange
Knight was, but the King did not know, and said, 'He pursued the
enemy, and I have not seen him since.'

She asked the Gardener about his assistant, but he laughed, and said,
'He has just come home on his three-legged horse, and the others made
fun of him, and said, "Here comes our hobbler back again," and asked
which hedge he had been sleeping under. He answered, "I did my best,
and without me things would have gone badly." Then they laughed at him
more than ever.'

The King said to his daughter, 'I will give a great feast lasting
three days, and you shall throw a golden apple. Perhaps the unknown
Knight will come among the others to try and catch it.'

When notice was given of the feast, the youth went to the wood and
called Iron Hans.

'What do you want?' he asked.

'I want to secure the King's golden apple,' he said.

'It is as good as yours already,' answered Iron Hans. 'You shall have
a tawny suit, and ride a proud chestnut.'

When the day arrived the youth took his place among the other Knights,
but no one knew him. The Princess stepped forward and threw the apple
among the Knights, and he was the only one who could catch it. As soon
as he had it he rode away.

On the second day Iron Hans fitted him out as a White Knight, riding a
gallant grey. Again he caught the apple; but he did not stay a minute,
and, as before, hurried away.

The King now grew angry, and said, 'This must not be; he must come
before me and give me his name.'

He gave an order that if the Knight made off again he was to be
pursued and brought back.

On the third day the youth received from Iron Hans a black outfit, and
a fiery black charger.

Again he caught the apple; but as he was riding off with it the King's
people chased him, and one came so near that he wounded him in the
leg. Still he escaped, but his horse galloped so fast that his helmet
fell off, and they all saw that he had golden hair. So they rode back,
and told the King what they had seen.

Next day the Princess asked the Gardener about his assistant.

'He is working in the garden. The queer fellow went to the feast, and
he only came back last night. He has shown my children three golden
apples which he won.'

The King ordered him to be brought before him. When he appeared he
still wore his cap. But the Princess went up to him and took it off;
then all his golden hair fell over his shoulders, and it was so
beautiful that they were all amazed by it.

'Are you the Knight who came to the feast every day in a different
colour, and who caught the three golden apples?' asked the King.

'Yes,' he answered, 'and here are the apples,' bringing them out of
his pocket, and giving them to the King. 'If you want further proof,
here is the wound in my leg given me by your people when they pursued
me. But I am also the Knight who helped you to conquer the enemy.'

'If you can do such deeds you are no Gardener's boy. Tell me who is
your father?'

'My father is a powerful King, and I have plenty of gold--as much as
ever I want.'

'I see very well,' said the King, 'that we owe you many thanks. Can I
do anything to please you?'

'Yes,' he answered; 'indeed, you can. Give me your daughter to be my
wife!'

The maiden laughed, and said, 'He does not beat about the bush; but I
saw long ago that he was no Gardener's boy.'

Then she went up to him and kissed him.

His father and mother came to the wedding, and they were full of joy,
for they had long given up all hope of ever seeing their dear son
again. As they were all sitting at the wedding feast, the music
suddenly stopped, the doors flew open, and a proud King walked in at
the head of a great following. He went up to the Bridegroom, embraced
him, and said, 'I am Iron Hans, who was bewitched and changed into a
Wild Man; but you have broken the spell and set me free. All the
treasure that I have is now your own.'

THE BAKER



I'd like to be a baker, and come when morning breaks,
Calling out, "Beeay-ko!" (that's the sound he makes)--
Riding in a rattle-cart that jogs and jolts and shakes,
Selling all the sweetest things a baker ever bakes;
Currant-buns and brandy-snaps, pastry all in flakes;
   But I wouldn't be a baker if . . . 
      I couldn't eat the cakes.
         Would you?



THE DAWN DANCE

What do you think I saw to-day when I arose at dawn?
Blue Wrens and Yellow-tails dancing on the lawn!
Bobbing here, and bowing there, gossiping away,
And how I wished that you were there to see the merry play!

But you were snug abed, my boy, blankets to your chin,
Nor dreamed of dancing birds without or sunbeams dancing in.
Grey Thrush, he piped the tune for them. I peeped out through the glass
Between the window curtains, and I saw them on the grass--

Merry little fairy folk, dancing up and down,
Blue bonnet, yellow skirt, cloaks of grey and brown,
Underneath the wattle-tree, silver in the dawn,
Blue Wrens and Yellow-tails dancing on the lawn.



CUPPACUMALONGA

'Rover, rover, cattle-drover, where go you to-day?'
I go to Cuppacumalonga, fifty miles away;
   Over plains where Summer rains have sung a song of glee,
   Over hills where laughing rills go seeking for the sea,
I go to Cuppacumalonga, to my brother Bill.
      Then come along, ah, come along!
         Ah, come to Cuppacumalonga!
            Come to Cuppacumalonga Hill!

'Rover, rover, cattle-drover, how do you get there?'
For twenty miles I amble on upon my pony mare,
   The walk awhile and talk awhile to country men I know,
   Then up to ride a mile beside a team that travels slow,
And last to Cuppacumalonga, riding with a will.
      Then come along, ah, come along!
         Ah, come to Cuppacumalonga!
            Come to Cuppacumalonga Hill!

'Rover, rover, cattle-drover, what do you do then?'
I camp beneath a kurrajong with three good cattle-men;
   Then off away at break of day, with strong hands on the reins,
   To laugh and sing while mustering the cattle on the plains--
For up to Cuppacumalonga life is jolly still.
      Then come along, ah, come along!
         Ah, come to Cuppacumalonga!
            Come to Cuppacumalonga Hill!

'Rover, rover, cattle-drover, how may I go too?'
I'll saddle up my creamy colt and he shall carry you--
   My creamy colt who will not bolt, who does not shy nor kick--
   We'll pack the load and take the road and travel very quick.
And if the day brings work or play we'll meet it with a will.
      So Hi for Cuppacumalonga!
         Come Along, ah, come along!
            Ah, come to Cuppacumalonga Hill!



THE SWAGMAN

Oh, he was old and he was spare;
His bushy whiskers and his hair
Were all fussed up and very grey
He said he'd come a long, long way
And had a long, long way to go.
Each boot was broken at the toe,
And he'd a swag upon his back.
His billy-can, as black as black,
Was just the thing for making tea
At picnics, so it seemed to me.

'Twas hard to earn a bite of bread,
He told me.  Then he shook his head,
And all the little corks that hung
Around his hat-brim danced and swung
And bobbed about his face; and when
I laughed he made them dance again.
He said they were for keeping flies--
"The pesky varmints"--from his eyes.
He called me "Codger". . . "Now you see
The best days of your life," said he.
"But days will come to bend your back,
And, when they come, keep off the track.
Keep off, young codger, if you can."
He seemed a funny sort of man.

He told me that he wanted work,
But jobs were scarce this side of Bourke,
And he supposed he'd have to go
Another fifty mile or so.
"Nigh all my life the track I've walked,"
He said.  I liked the way he talked.
And oh, the places he had seen!
I don't know where he had not been--
On every road, in every town,
All through the country, up and down.
"Young codger, shun the track," he said.
And put his hand upon my head.
I noticed, then, that his old eyes
Were very blue and very wise.
"Ay, once I was a little lad,"
He said, and seemed to grow quite sad.

I sometimes think: When I'm a man,
I'll get a good black billy-can
And hang some corks around my hat,
And lead a jolly life like that.



THE ANT EXPLORER

Once a little sugar ant made up his mind to roam--
To fare away far away, far away from home.
He had eaten all his breakfast, and he had his ma's consent
To see what he should chance to see and here's the way he went--
Up and down a fern frond, round and round a stone,
Down a gloomy gully where he loathed to be alone,
Up a mighty mountain range, seven inches high,
Through the fearful forest grass that nearly hid the sky,
Out along a bracken bridge, bending in the moss,
Till he reached a dreadful desert that was feet and feet across.
'Twas a dry, deserted desert, and a trackless land to tread,
He wished that he was home again and tucked-up tight in bed.
His little legs were wobbly, his strength was nearly spent,
And so he turned around again and here's the way he went--
Back away from desert lands feet and feet across,
Back along the bracken bridge bending in the moss,
Through the fearful forest grass shutting out the sky,
Up a mighty mountain range seven inches high,
Down a gloomy gully, where he loathed to be alone,
Up and down a fern frond and round and round a stone.
A dreary ant, a weary ant, resolved no more to roam,
He staggered up the garden path and popped back home.



RIDING SONG

Flippity-flop!  Flippity-flop!
Here comes the butcher to bring us a chop
   Cantering, cantering down the wide street
   On his little bay mare with the funny white feet;
Cantering, cantering out to the farm,
Stripes on his apron and basket on arm.
   Run to the window and tell him to stop--
   Flippity-flop!  Flippity-flop!



THE FUNNY HATTER

Harry was a funny man, Harry was a hatter;
He ate his lunch at breakfast time and said it didn't matter.
He made a pot of melon jam and put it on a shelf,
For he was fond of sugar things and living by himself.
He built a fire of bracken and a blue-gum log,
And he sat all night beside it with his big--black--dog.



THE POSTMAN

I'd like to be a postman, and walk along the street,
Calling out, "Good Morning, Sir," to gentlemen I meet,
Ringing every door-bell all along my beat,
In my cap and uniform so very nice and neat.
Perhaps I'd have a parasol in case of rain or heat;
   But I wouldn't be a postman if . . . 
      The walking hurt my feet.
         Would you?



THE TRAVELLER

As I rode in to Burrumbeet,
I met a man with funny feet;
And, when I paused to ask him why
His feet were strange, he rolled his eye
And said the rain would spoil the wheat;
So I rode on to Burrumbeet.

As I rode in to Beetaloo,
I met a man whose nose was blue;
And when I asked him how he got
A nose like that, he answered, "What
Do bullocks mean when they say 'Moo'?"
So I rode on to Beetaloo.

As I rode in to Ballarat,
I met a man who wore no hat;
And, when I said he might take cold,
He cried, "The hills are quite as old
As yonder plains, but not so flat."
So I rode on to Ballarat.

As I rode in to Gundagai,
I met a man and passed him by
Without a nod, without a word.
He turned, and said he'd never heard
Or seen a man so wise as I.
But I rode on to Gundagai.

As I rode homeward, full of doubt,
I met a stranger riding out:
A foolish man he seemed to me;
But, "Nay, I am yourself," said he,
"Just as you were when you rode out."
So I rode homeward, free of doubt.



OUR STREET

In our street, the main street
   Running thro' the town,
You see a lot of busy folk
   Going up and down:

Bag men and basket men,
   Men with loads of hay,
Buying things and selling things
   And carting things away.

The butcher is a funny man,
   He calls me Dandy Dick;
The baker is a cross man,
   I think he's often sick;

The fruiterer's a nice man,
   He gives me apples, too;
The grocer says, "Good morning, boy,
   What can I do for you?"

Of all the men in our street
   I like the cobbler best,
Tapping, tapping at his last
   Without a minute's rest;

Talking all the time he taps,
   Driving in the nails,
Smiling with his old grey eyes--
   (Hush) . . .  telling fairy tales.



THE LITTLE RED HOUSE

Very few grown-up people understand houses. Only children understand
them properly, and, if I understand them just a little, it is because
I knew Sym. Sym and his wife, Emily Ann, lived in the Little Red
House. It was built on a rather big mountain, and there were no other
houses near it. At one time, long ago, the mountain had been covered
all over with a great forest; but men had cut the trees down, all but
one big Blue-gum, which grew near the Little Red House. The Blue-gum
and the Little Red House were great friends, and often had long talks
together. The Blue-gum was a very old tree--over a hundred years
old--and he was proud of it, and often used to tell of the time, long
ago, when blackfellows hunted 'possums in his branches. That was
before the white men came to the mountain, and before there were any
houses near it.

Once upon a time I put a verse about the mountain and the Little Red
House into a book of rhymes which I wrote for grown ups. I don't
think they thought much about it. Very likely they said, "0h, it's
just a house on a hill," and then forgot it, because they were too
busy about other things.

This is the rhyme:

A great mother mountain, and kindly is she,
Who nurses young rivers and sends them to sea.
And, nestled high up on her sheltering lap,
Is a little red house, with a little straw cap
That bears a blue feather of smoke, curling high,
And a bunch of red roses cocked over one eye.

I have tried here to draw the Little Red House for you as well as I
can; and it isn't my fault if it happens to look just a little like
somebody's face. I can't help it, can I? if the stones of the door-step
look something like teeth, or if the climbing roses make the windows
look like a funny pair of spectacles. And if Emily Ann will hang bib
fluffy bobs on the window blinds for tassels, and if they swing about
in the breeze like moving eyes, well, I am not to blame, am I? It
just happens. The only thing I am sorry for is that I couldn't get
the big Blue-gum into the picture. Of course, I could have drawn it
quite easily, but it was too big.

Sym and Emily Ann were fond of the Little Red House, and you may be
sure the Little Red House was fond of them--he was their home. The
only thing that bothered him was that they were sometimes away from
home, and then he was miserable, like all empty houses.

Now, Sym was a tinker--a travelling tinker. He would do a little
gardening and farming at home for a while, and then go off about the
country for a few days, mending people's pots and pans and kettles.
Usually Sym left Emily Ann at home to keep the Little Red House
company, but now and then Emily Ann went with Sym for a trip, and
then the Little Red House was very sad indeed.

One morning, just as the sun was peeping over the edge of the world,
the big Blue-gum woke up and stretched his limbs and waited for the
Little Red House to say "Good morning." The Blue-gum always waited
for the greeting because he was the older, and he liked to have
proper respect shown to him by young folk, but the Little Red House
didn't say a word.

The big Blue-gum waited and waited; but the Little Red House wouldn't
speak.

After a while the Blue-gum said rather crossly, "You seem to be out
of sorts this morning."

But the Little Red House wouldn't say a word.

"You certainly do seem as if you had a pain somewhere," said the
Blue-gum. "And you look funny. You ought to see yourself!"

"Indeed?" snapped the Little Red House, raising his eyebrows just as
a puff of wind went by. "I can't always be playing the fool, like
some people."

"I've lived on this mountain, tree and sapling, for over a hundred
years," replied the big Blue-gum very severely, "and never before
have I been treated with such disrespect. When trees become houses
they seem to lose their manners."

"Forgive me," cried the Little Red House. "I didn't mean to be rude.
I was just listening. There are things going on inside me that I
don't like."

"I hope they aren't ill-treating you," said the Blue-gum.

"They are going to leave me!" sighed the Little Red House.

"And they are laughing quite happily, as if they were glad about it.
There's a nice thing for you!--Going to leave me, and laughing about it!"

"But perhaps you are wrong," said the big Blue-gum, who was not so
hard-hearted as he seemed.

"I always know," moaned the Little Red House. "I can't be mistaken.
Sym was singing his Tinker's song this morning long before the sun
was up. And then I heard him tell Emily Ann not to forget her umbrella.
That means that she is going; and the little dog is going, and I shall
be all alone."

"Well," answered the Blue-gum rather stiffly, "you still have ME for
company."

"I know," sighed the Little Red House. "Don't think I'm ungrateful.
But, when they both go away, I shan't be really and truly a home again
until they come back--just an empty house; and it makes me miserable.
How would YOU like to be an empty house?"

"Some day I might be," replied the Blue-gum, "if I don't grow too old.
There is some fine timber in me yet."

Suddenly there was a great clattering and stamping inside the Little
House, and Sym began to sing his Tinker's song.

"Kettles and pans! Kettles and pans!
All the broad earth is the tinkering man's--
The green leafy lane or the fields are his home,
The road or the river, where'er he way roam.
He roves for a living and rests where he can.
Then bring out your kettle! ho! kettle or pan!"

There's a nice thing for you!" said the Little Red House bitterly.
"What kind of a song do you call that? Any old place is good enough
for his home, and I am just nothing!"

"Oh, that's only his way of putting it," answered the Blue-gum kindly.
"He doesn't really mean it, you know; he wants a change, that's all."

But the Little Red House wouldn't say a word.

"It looks a good deal like rain this morning, doesn't it?" said the
Blue-gum cheerfully, trying to change the subject.

But the Little Red House wouldn't say a word.

Very soon Sym and Emily Ann, carrying bundles, came out of the Little
Red House, laughing and talking; and Sym locked the door.

"Now for a jolly trip!" shouted Sym, as he picked up his firepot and
soldering-irons.

But all at once Emily Ann ceased laughing and looked back wistfully
at the Little Red House.

"After all I'm sorry to leave our little home," she said. "See how
sad it looks!"

"Hurry on!" cried Sym, who was all eagerness for the trip. Then he,
too, looked back. "Why, you forgot to draw down the blinds," he said.

"No, I didn't forget," answered Emily Ann, "but I think it a shame to
blindfold the Little Red House while we are away. I just left the
blinds up so that he could see things. Good-bye, little home," she
called. And the Little Red House felt just the least bit comforted to
think that Emily Ann was sorry to leave him. Then she went off down
the winding path with Sym; and Sym began to shout his Tinker's Song
again.

The Little Red House watched them go down the mountain.

Away they went: through the gate, past the black stump, round by the
bracken patch and over the bridge, across the potato paddock, through
the sliprails--getting smaller and smaller--past the sign-post, down
by the big rocks--getting smaller and smaller--under the tree-ferns,
out on to the stony flat, across the red road, until they were just
two tiny specks away down in the valley. Then they went through a
white gate, round a turn, and the high scrub hid them.

Had you been able to see the Little Red House just at that moment, you
would have been sure he was going to cry--he looked so miserable and
so lonely.

"Cheer up!" said the big Blue-gum.

But the Little Red House couldn't say a word.

Presently the big Blue-gum groaned loudly.

"Oo! Ah! Ah! Golly!" groaned the Blue-gum in a strange voice.

"I beg your pardon? said the Little Red House.

"Oh, I have a nasty sharp pain in my side," said the Blue-gum. "I do
hope and trust it isn't white-ants. It would be simply horrible, if
it were. Fancy getting white-ants at my time of life! Here I have
lived on this mountain, tree and sapling, for over a hundred years;
and to think those nasty, white, flabby little things should get me
at last is horrible--horrible!"

"I am sorry," said the Little Red House. "I'm afraid I've been very
selfish, too. I was forgetting that everyone has troubles of his own;
but I hope it isn't so bad as you fear."

"It is bad enough," groaned the Blue-gum. "Ow! There it is again. I'm
afraid it IS white-ants. I can feel the wretched little things nipping."

But the Little Red House hardly heard him. He was thinking again of
his own troubles.

So they stood all through that day, saying very little to each other.
Rabbits came and played about the Little Red House, and lizards ran
over his door-step, and once a big wallaby went flopping right past
the front gate. But the Little Red House paid no attention. He was
too busy thinking of his loneliness.

Birds came and perched in the branches of the big Blue-gum, and
chattered and sang to him, trying to tell him the news of other trees
on distant mountains. But the big Blue-gum took no notice. He was too
busy thinking about white-ants.

So the sun sank low behind the Little House, and the shadow of the
tall Blue-gum began to creep down the mountain and get longer and
longer.

Just as it was growing dark, the big Blue-gum said Suddenly, "It
certainly looks more like rain than ever. The heavy clouds have been
gathering all day, and we shall get it properly to-night."

But the rain did not come that night, nor the next day, nor for two
days and nights. And all this while the Little Red House and the Big
Blue-gum remained silent and miserable--one through loneliness, the
other through white-ants.

But on the evening of the third day the big Blue-gum said, "The rain
will come to-night for certain. I know by the feel of the air."

"Let it come!" said the Little Red House. "I don't care. I couldn't
be more miserable than I am."

Just as he said that, one great rain-drop fell right on the middle
of his roof--Plop!

"It's coming already," cried the Blue-gum, "and it's going to pour."

Then three more big drops fell--Plop! Plop! Plop!

"I have never in my life seen such big rain-drops," said the Blue-gum.
"I've lived on this mountain, tree and sapling, for--"

But--Crash! came rain before he could finish; and in two seconds
everything was sopping wet. The noise of it was deafening,

"Why, it's a cloud-burst!" shouted the Blue-gum. "Half of my leaves
have been stripped off already." Then he peered through the rain and
the dark to see how the Little Red House was taking it. "Why, what's
the matter with your face?" he cried. "You look awful."

"I'm crying!" sobbed the Little Red House. "That's all--just crying.
"Can't you see the tears?"

"Nonsense!" said the Blue-gum. "Those are not tears. It's just the
rain-water running off your window-sills."

"I tell you I'm crying!" wailed the Little Red House. "I'm crying
bitterly. I should know, shouldn't I? I'm shivering and crying
because I'm cold and lonely and miserable."

"Oh, very well," agreed the Blue-gum. "You are crying. But if this
rain doesn't stop soon, you'll cry the front path away. It certainly
is wet."

Very late that night the rain eased a little and then stopped
altogether. The tears ceased to run from the eyes of the Little
Red House, and they now came only in drops, slower and slower, falling
into the great pool by the front door.

"It's a hard world!" sobbed the Little Red House, squeezing out
another tear.

"Listen!" cried the Big Blue-gum. "Do you hear THAT?"

From far away on the distant ranges came a dull, moaning sound. As
they listened it grew louder, and right in the middle of of it came
another sound--Thump!

"That's wind," said the Blue-gum; "and a big wind, too."

"Let it come!" sighed the Little Red House. "I couldn't be more
miserable than I am."

As he spoke, the moaning grew louder, and there were three or four
quite big thumps one after another.

"What's that thumping?" asked the little House.

"Those are my poor brothers," answered the big Blue-gum very sadly,
"Those are trees going down before the big wind. The birds were
bringing me messages from those poor fellows quite lately; and now I
shall never hear from them again. It's very sad."

"I never thought the wind could blow down big trees," said the Little
House.

"No tree knows when his time will come," the big Blue-gum answered
gravely. "I've had some very narrow escapes in my time, as tree and
sapling on this mountain."

The Little Red House was very quiet and thoughtful for a long time
after that. Then he asked suddenly, "Which way do you think you would
fall if you did fall?"

But the big Blue-gum said that he couldn't tell. It depended on the
wind, and he might fall any way.

"Not on me!" cried the Little House.

The Blue-gum said that he didn't know; but he hoped not.

"If you DID fall on me," said the Little Red House, "I suppose it
would hurt me."

The Blue-gum said it certainly would, and there would be very little
left but splinters and glass.

"Then don't! Please don't," yelled the Little Red House.

But before they could say another word the great wind struck them with
a roar. It tossed the roses about so that the eyebrows of the Little
House seemed to be twitching horribly; and it swayed the big Blue-gum
this way and that till he appeared to be fighting for his very life.
It picked up the fallen leaves and twigs, and even small stones, and
hurled them down the mountain in a cloud.

In the midst of all the uproar the Little House heard the Blue-gum
calling to him.

"As long as I've lived upon this mountain, tree and sapling," he
shouted, "I've never known such a wind. I'm not so young as I used to
be, and I fear that my end has come."

"Be brave! Oh, be brave!" implored the Little Red House. "Don't let
him blow you down. I should be so sorry to lose you, What are you
grunting for?"

"I'm not grunting," answered the Blue-gym in a pained voice. "Those
are my roots giving way, one by one. I can't stand much more of this.
Look out!"

The Little Red House looked up, and what he saw terrified him. The
big Blue-gum, in the clutch of the wind, was bent right over him,
so that the top branches seemed to be just above his roof; and the
great tree appeared to be falling, falling, helplessly.

"Don't fall on me!" shrieked the Little Red House. "Oh, don't fall
on me; because, if you do, you know you'll squash me! I don't want
to be squashed!"

But the big Blue-gum said, "There is just one little root holding
now. If that gives way we are both done for."

"Be brave! Oh, be brave!" shrieked the Little Red House.

Then slowly, very slowly, the big Blue-gum began to straighten up
again, away from the Little Red House.

"I have stood upon this mountain, tree and sapling, for over a
hundred years," he said when he had recovered; "but if it blows like
that again, it is the end of me."

But it did not blow like that again; though the wind howled and
shrieked all that day as if it was very angry and disappointed that
it could not blow down the big Blue-gum.

Then, towards evening, the wind fell; the heavy clouds went away
beyond the edge of the sky, and all became very calm and peaceful.

The birds came from their hiding places and sat in the branches of
the Blue-gum and chattered away to him, until he began to feel quite
cheerful once more, in spite of his trouble. And when a certain
little Tree-creeper--a very wise bird--came and had a long, serious
talk with the Blue-gum, he became very much interested indeed and
quite happy.

But the Little Red House was miserable still; and the beauty of
the evening didn't cheer him up one bit.

"Ah, well," said the Blue-gum, when the darkness came to the mountain,
"I am going to have a good sleep tonight. I'm a match still for old
Daddy Wind, in spite of all his noise and bluster. And there are ways
of dealing with white-ants, too. I've lived upon this mountain, tree
and sapling, for--"

But as he was talking he fell fast asleep.

The Little Red House did not sleep. How could he, with his eyes wide
open? So he just stood there all night staring before him, lonely and
wretched. And when an owl came and sat in the tree and began to call,
"Mopoke," the Little Red House told him rudely to stop his silly noise
and clear out. That will just show you how very miserable he was.

It was quite late next morning when the Blue-gum awoke. He stretched
his big limbs, and began to wonder what he might say to comfort the
Little Red House. But when the Blue-gum looked down, he saw that the
Little Red House was smiling all over his face.

"Well, now!" cried the big Blue-gum cheerfully. "That's the kind of
face I like to see in the morning! So you've decided to be sensible
and forget your loneliness?"

But the Little Red House didn't say a word. He just went on smiling.

Then the big Blue-gum began to get uneasy.

"I do hope your troubles haven't turned you silly," he said. "You
haven't lost your senses, have you?"

"I?" cried the Little Red House. "Why, look down the valley! See
who's coming!"

Down, far down, the valley, just coming through the white gate, were
two figures that looked like tiny specks. And much nearer was another
speck, which was certainly a little dog.

"It's them--I mean those are they!" shouted the Little Red House
happily. "Sym and Emily Ann! And here comes our little dog."

"Well, you certainly have sharp eyes," replied the Blue-gum. "But I
suppose I'm getting old--over a hundred years, you know."

The two figures were through the white gate now, and had crossed the
red road out on to the stony flat--getting bigger and bigger as they
came; and the smile on the Little Red House seemed to grow broader
and broader. On they came, under the tree-ferns, up by the big rocks,
past the sign-post. And now the Little Red House could hear Sym
singing his Tinker's song.

But it was not quite the same song this time:

"Kettles and pans! Ho, kettles and pans!
Where's there a home like the tinkering man's?
Weary of wandering, home is the place--
The Little Red House with the smile on his face--
Weary and hungry, my Emily Ann.
Then put on the kettle! Ho, put on the pan!"

"Now THAT is the sort of song I DO like," said the Little Red House,
as he watched them coming up the mountain.

On they came, growing bigger and bigger--through the sliprails, across
the potato paddock, over the bridge, round by the bracken-patch, past
the black stump, through the gate, and here they were, right at the
front door.

"Oh, I AM glad to be home again," cried Emily Ann. "And do look at the
Little House. He seems to be smiling."

"Of course he is smiling," answered Sym; "but he has a very dirty face."

"The storm did that," said Emily Ann. "Now hurry and get the fire
alight, and I'll put the kettle on." And they went inside laughing
and singing, while the little dog flew round the house, barking for
dear life, and pretending he was very busy seeing everything was
in order.

"Now I suppose you're happy," said the big Blue-gum to the Little
Red House.

"Happy?" cried the Little House. "Of course I am. Why, I'm a home
again!" But suddenly he remembered that his own happiness had made
him forget all about his old friend's troubles; and he tried his best
to look serious, as he said: "But what about YOU? Are the white-ants
still troubling you?"

"Ah!" replied the Blue-gum. "Don't let that worry you. Yesterday I
had a talk with the doctor--Doctor Tree-creeper, you know--a very
clever little bird he is, and he knows all about white-ants. He
examined me thoroughly all over. He says that they have hardly got
under my skin yet, and he will have them all out in a couple of days.
So THAT'S all right."

"Well, I am glad," shouted the Little Red House. "Now we are ALL happy!"

Then Sym got the fire started, and the smoke curled up, and the Little
House had his gay blue feather once again. Sym began to sing his
Tinker's Song louder than ever, and Emily Ann, who was getting the
meal ready, joined in and sang too. Very soon the kettle also began
to sing, and, when the pan heard that HE began to sing. Then Doctor
Tree-creeper arrived to attend to the white-ants, and, as he walked
round the trunk of the big Blue-gum, tapping it just like a doctor,
HE began to sing. And two Kookaburras, who were sitting on the fence,
were so tickled with it all, that they laughed and laughed till they
made everyone else laugh with them.

"This is quite like old times," laughed the big Blue-gum. "Are you
contented now?"

"Am I contented?" cried the Little Red House. "Am I contented? Well,
what would you think?"

And then--well, most ordinary grown-up folk would tell you that just
then Emily Ann drew down one of the front blinds. But all the big
Blue-gum knew, and all you and I know, is that the Little Red House
winked.

And when I saw him last, his smile was as broad as ever, and he was
still winking.



THE PIEMAN

I'd like to be a pieman, and ring a little bell,
Calling out, "Hot pies! Hot pies to sell!"
Apple-pies and Meat-pies, Cherry-pies as well,
Lots and lots and lots of pies--more than you can tell.
Big, rich Pork-pies! Oh, the lovely smell!
   But I wouldn't be a pieman if . . . 
      I wasn't very well.
         Would you?



THE TRIANTIWONTIGONGOLOPE

There's a very funny insect that you do not often spy,
And it isn't quite a spider, and it isn't quite a fly;
It is something like a beetle, and a little like a bee,
But nothing like a wooly grub that climbs upon a tree.
Its name is quite a hard one, but you'll learn it soon, I hope.
So try:
   Tri-
      Tri-anti-wonti-
         Triantiwontigongolope.

It lives on weeds and wattle-gum, and has a funny face;
Its appetite is hearty, and its manners a disgrace.
When first you come upon it, it will give you quite a scare,
But when you look for it again, you find it isn't there.
And unless you call it softly it will stay away and mope.
So try:
   Tri-
      Tri-anti-wonti-
         Triantiwontigongolope.

It trembles if you tickle it or tread upon its toes;
It is not an early riser, but it has a snubbish nose.
If you snear at it, or scold it, it will scuttle off in shame,
But it purrs and purrs quite proudly if you call it by its name,
And offer it some sandwiches of sealing-wax and soap.
So try:
   Tri-
      Tri-anti-wonti-
         Triantiwontigongolope .

But of course you haven't seen it; and I truthfully confess
That I haven't seen it either, and I don't know its address.
For there isn't such an insect, though there really might have been
If the trees and grass were purple, and the sky was bottle green.
It's just a little joke of mine, which you'll forgive, I hope.
Oh, try!
   Tri-
      Tri-anti-wonti-
         Triantiwontigongolope.



THE CIRCUS

Hey, there!  Hoop-la! the circus is in town!
Have you seen the elephant?  Have you seen the clown?
Have you seen the dappled horse gallop round the ring?
Have you seen the acrobats on the dizzy swing?
Have you seen the tumbling men tumble up and down?
Hoop-la!  Hoop-la! the circus is in town!

Hey, there!  Hoop-la!  Here's the circus troupe!
Here's the educated dog, jumping through the hoop.
See the lady Blondin with the parasol and fan,
The lad upon the ladder and the india-rubber man.
See the joyful juggler and the boy who loops the loop.
Hey!  Hey!  Hey!  Hey!  Here's the circus troupe!



YOU AND I

They say the eagle is a bird
That sees some splendid sights
When he soars high into the sky
Upon his dizzy flights:
He sees the ground for miles around
Our house, and Billy Johnson's;
But we cannot be eagles, for
That would, of course, be nonsense.

But you and I, some summer day,
Providing we're allowed,
Will go up in an aeroplane
And sail right through a cloud.
But, if they say we may not go,
We'll stay upon the ground
With other things that have no wings,
And watch them walk around.

They say the bottom of the sea
Is beautiful to view;
They say the fish, whene'er they wish,
Can sail and see it, too;
The shining pearls, the coral curls,
The sharks, the squids, the schnappers,
And fish with fins (though not in tins)
And fish with funny flappers.

But you and I, some sunny day,
When weather's in condition,
Will go there in a submarine,
Providing we've permission.

But if they say we may not go
We must respect their wishes;
And you and I will just keep dry
Because we are not fishes.

The earth is quite a jolly place,
And we don't care for flying;
And things that creep down in the deep
Are sometimes rather trying.
So, if they'll grant a holiday
Or even only half,
We'll lie upon some grassy place,
And think of things, and laugh.



GOING TO SCHOOL

Did you see them pass to-day, Billy, Kate and Robin,
All astride upon the back of old grey Dobbin?
Jigging, jogging off to school, down the dusty track--
What must Dobbin think of it--three upon his back?
Robin at the bridle-rein, in the middle Kate,
Billy holding on behind, his legs out straight.

Now they're coming back from school, jig, jog, jig.
See them at the corner where the gums grow big;
Dobbin flicking off the flies and blinking at the sun--
Having three upon his back he thinks is splendid fun:
Robin at the bridle-rein, in the middle Kate,
Little Billy up behind, his legs out straight.



HIST!

Hist! . . . . . . Hark!
The night is very dark,
And we've to go a mile or so
Across the Possum Park.

Step . . . . . . light,
Keeping to the right;
If we delay, and lose our way,
We'll be out half the night.
The clouds are low and gloomy. Oh!
It's just begun to mist!
We haven't any overcoats
And--Hist! . . . . . . Hist!

(Mo . . . . . . poke!)
Who was that that spoke?
This is not a fitting spot
To make a silly joke.

Dear . . . . . . me!
A mopoke in a tree!
It jarred me so, I didn't know
Whatever it could be.
But come along; creep along;
Soon we shall be missed.
They'll get a scare and wonder where
We--Hush! . . . . . . Hist!

Ssh! . . . . . . Soft!
I've told you oft and oft
We should not stray so far away
Without a moon aloft.

Oo! . . . . . . Scat!
Goodness! What was that?
Upon my word, it's quite absurd,
It's only just a cat.
But come along; haste along;
Soon we'll have to rush,
Or we'll be late and find the gate
Is--Hist! . . . . . . Hush!

(Kok!. . . . . . Korrock!)
Oh! I've had a shock!
I hope and trust it's only just
A frog behind a rock.

Shoo! . . . . . . Shoo!
We've had enough of you;
Scaring folk just for a joke
Is not the thing to do.
But come along, slip along--
Isn't it a lark
Just to roam so far from home
On--Hist! . . . . . . Hark!

Look! . . . . . . See!
Shining through the tree,
The window-light is glowing bright
To welcome you and me.

Shout! . . . . . . Shout!
There's someone round about,
And through the door I see some more
And supper all laid out.
Now, run! Run! Run!
Oh, we've had such splendid fun--
Through the park in the dark,
As brave as anyone.

Laughed, we did, and chaffed, we did,
And whistled all the way,
And we're home again! Home again!
Hip . . . . . . Hooray!



BIRD SONG

I am friendly with the sparrow
Though his mind is rather narrow
   And his manners--well, the less we say the better.
But as day begins to peep,
When I hear his cheery "Cheep"
   I am ready to admit I am his debtor

I delight in red-browed finches
And all birds of scanty inches.
   Willie wagtail is a pleasant bird, and coy.
All the babblers, chats and wrens,
Tits and robins, and their hens,
   Are my very special friends, and bring me joy.



THE MUSIC OF YOUR VOICE

A vase upon the mantelpiece,
   A ship upon the sea,
A goat upon a mountain-top
   Are much the same to me;
But when you mention melon jam,
   Or picnics by the creek,
Or apple pies, or pantomimes,
   I love to hear you speak.

The date of Magna Charta or
   The doings of the Dutch,
Or capes, or towns, or verbs, or nouns
   Do not excite me much;
But when you mention motor rides--
   Down by the sea for choice
Or chasing games, or chocolates,
   I love to hear your voice.



THE BOY WHO RODE INTO THE SUNSET

Once upon a time--it was not so very long ago, either--a little boy,
named Neville, lived with his people in a house which was almost in
the country. That is to say, it was just at the edge of the city; and
at the back of the house was a rather large hill, which was quite
bald.

Neville, who was fond of playing by himself, would often wander to the
top of the bald hill; and if he stood right on top of it and looked
one way, toward the East, he could see right over the city, with all
its tall buildings and domes and spires and smoking chimneys. But
looking the other way, to the West, he could see for miles over the
beautiful country, with its green fields and orchards and white roads
and little farm houses.

One evening Neville was playing alone on the top of the hill when he
noticed that one of the very finest sunsets he had ever seen was just
coming on. The sky in the West, away over the broad country lands, was
filled with little clouds of all sorts and shapes, and they were just
beginning to take on the most wonderful colours.

Neville had often before amused himself with watching clouds and the
strange shapes into which they changed themselves--sometimes like
great mountain ranges, sometimes like sea-waves, and very often like
elephants and lions and seals and all manner of interesting things of
that sort. But never before had he been able to make out so many
animal shapes in the clouds. The sky was almost as good as a Zoo.
There were kangaroos and elephants and a hen with chickens and
wallabies and rabbits and a funny man with large ears and all sorts of
other peculiar shapes.

The sun was sinking behind a distant range of hills, where a golden
light shone out as if through a gateway. It was so much like a great
golden gateway that Neville fell to wondering what might be found on
the other side of it.

Suddenly, right in the middle of all the coloured clouds, he saw one
little cloud which was perfectly white, and, as he watched it, he
noticed that it seemed to be shaped like a small horse. A very small
horse it seemed at that distance; but, as Neville gazed, it grew
bigger and bigger, just as if it were coming toward him very fast, and
he was almost certain he could see its legs moving.

That startled him a little, and so he rubbed his eyes to make sure
that they were not playing him tricks.

When he looked again he was more startled than ever; for the little
white cloud was no longer a cloud, but a little white horse in real
earnest. Besides, it had just left the sky and was galloping down the
mountain range which he could see away in the West.

In two minutes it had left the range, and was coming across the fields
towards him, jumping the fences, dodging under the trees, and racing
across the plain with its white mane and tail tossing as it came. It
seemed to be making straight for him.

He was not really frightened--you must not think that about him--but
he was just beginning to wonder if it were not nearly time to go home
to dinner, when he noticed that the white horse had stopped, just at
the foot of the bald hill. It was looking up at him, tossing its head
and pawing the ground--the most beautiful white horse that he had ever
seen, even in a circus. Then it appeared to get over its excitement
and began to trot quietly up the hill toward him.

I do not think anyone would have blamed Neville if he had decided then
to go home to dinner at once. But he was rather a brave boy, and he
was certainly very curious, so he just stood still and waited.

And here is where the most wonderful part of the story begins. The
white horse trotted up to Neville and spoke to him. That would
surprise most people; and Neville was certainly as much surprised as
anyone else would have been.

"What are you frightened of?" asked the white horse in a loud voice.

Now, Neville WAS just a little frightened by this time; but he was not
going to show it, so he just said, "Who's frightened?"

"YOU'RE frightened," said the white horse, louder than ever. "You're
only a timid little boy. I thought when I saw you in the distance that
you were one of the plucky ones; but I was mistaken. You're just a
little cowardly-custard."

"You'd better be careful who you're talking to," said Neville,
suddenly losing his fear. (Little boys do not always talk good
grammar; otherwise he would have said "whom" not "who.") He hated to
be called a "cowardly-custard." "You'd better be careful, or I'll give
you a bang!"

"Ah ha!" cried the white horse. "Very brave all at once, aren't you?
All the same, you're afraid to come near and stroke me."

"But I don't want to stroke you," said Neville.

"I thought not," replied the white horse. "I thought not, the moment I
got close to you. You're one of the frightened ones, and I've been
wasting my time."

"Who's frightened?" said Neville again.

"You asked that before," replied the white horse, "and I told you. If
you're not frightened, come along and stroke me. There's nothing to be
afraid of."

So Neville walked right up to the white horse and stroked his
shoulder. And at once he felt that he had been foolish to hold back.
For of all the smooth, soft, silky coats he had ever stroked, that of
the white horse was certainly the smoothest, and the softest, and the
silkiest. He felt that he could go on stroking it for hours.

"There now," said the white horse in a voice as soft and silky as his
coat. "There was nothing to be afraid of, was there? And I think that
perhaps I was mistaken about you. I rather think you might be one of
those daring boys that one reads about in stories. What about jumping
on my back for a little ride?"

Neville ceased to stroke the white horse and drew back a little.

"I'm afraid they'll be expecting me home for dinner," he said. "I'm
very pleased indeed to have met you." Neville was always a polite
little boy.

"The very thing!" cried the white horse. "Jump on my back and I'll
take you home. You liked stroking me, didn't you? Well that's nothing
to the ride you will enjoy--simply nothing. Why, all the boldest
riders in the world would give their ears just for one little ride on
my back. Now then! One, two, three, and up you go!"

Then before Neville quite knew what he was doing, he made a little run
and leapt up astride of the white horse.

"I live just over there," said Neville, pointing towards his home.

But before he could say "knife", or even "scissors" (supposing he had
wished to say either of these words), the white horse laughed a nasty
hollow laugh, sprang upwards from the ground, and was soaring through
the air toward the dying sunset, right away from home and dinner.

Neville clung on tightly, for he was so high above the earth that to
fall off would mean the end of him. And far beneath him he saw the
green fields and the white road, which now seemed like a mere thread.

"That's not fair! Whoa back! Whoa back!" he shouted to the white
horse; but the white horse made no reply. Indeed, he seemed suddenly
not so much like a white horse as like a white cloud shaped like a
horse, and Neville saw that he no longer sat upon the horse's silky
coat, but upon something soft and downy like a white fleece, and it
was slightly damp. Then he knew that he was riding upon a cloud; and,
as it was quite absurd to go on talking to a cloud, he ceased to cry
out. He just sat tight and wondered what would happen next.

He was high over a farm-house now: one that he used to see from the
bald hill. He knew it by the tall pine-trees that grew round it; and
down in the farm-yard he saw a man with a bucket going out to feed the
calves. Neville called loudly to him, but the man did not even look
up. Now he was far beyond that farm-house and above an orchard, where
he saw the fruit-trees standing in straight rows; and a few seconds
later the mountain range was beneath him, and Neville knew that the
cloud that looked like a horse was making straight for the golden
gateway, which was now glowing dully in a grey sky. He was riding into
the sunset.

Swiftly as the wind that drove it, the Cloud Horse drifted over the
mountain range. There was a sudden glow of golden light all about him,
and then a flash of colour so wonderful that Neville could not bear to
look. He closed his eyes, and, as he did so, he felt that the Cloud
Horse had come to a halt at last.

So Neville sat upon the cloud, not daring to open his eyes for quite a
long time. When at last he did look again he almost fainted with the
wonder of it. He was inside the sunset.

But scarcely had he begun to enjoy the wonderful sight, when he was
startled by the sound of a funny, shrill little voice close by his
side. Looking down, he saw a strange little man, no taller than a
walking-stick, and dressed from top to toe in golden-yellow clothes.
"My stars!" said the wee yellow man. "How did YOU manage to get in
here? Don't you know this is private?"

"I'm very sorry," said Neville, "but I couldn't help it. The Cloud
Horse brought me, you know."

"Ah!" said the wee yellow man. "He tricked you, did he? He's much too
playful, that Cloud Horse; and, I must say, he's put you in a pretty
fix."

"Excuse me," said Neville, "but do you mind telling me who you are?"

"I?" cried the little yellow man. "Why, I'm the Last Sunbeam, of
course. I thought you knew that. My job, you know, is to shut up the
show when the sunset is over. And it's pretty hard work, I can tell
you, because I've got to keep on doing it all round the earth every
few minutes or so. And it gets very tiresome at times. Would you
believe it? I've never seen a dawn or a bright mid-day in all my
life--just sunsets all the time. Sunsets for breakfast, sunsets for
dinner, sunsets for supper. And if I make the tiniest little slip, the
head scene-shifter is down on me like a ton of bricks."

"Goodness me!" said Neville. "I didn't know you had scene-shifters
here." Neville had been to see pantomimes, and therefore knew what a
scene-shifter was.

"Then how do you think we shift the scenes?" cried the wee yellow man
rather crossly. Then he suddenly became very busy about nothing, as he
whispered, "Look out! Here's the head scene-shifter coming now."

Looking back, Neville saw, coming towards them, a man with very large
ears. He was not a nice-looking man, and he was extremely like the
cloud man that Neville had sometimes seen in the sky when he went to
look at the sunset from the bald hill.

"Now then! Now then!" roared the man with the large ears. "Move
yourself there, Goldie! We shut up the show here in a few minutes, and
open at once on the next range. See that you have that curtain down on
time."

"Certainly, sir," replied the little yellow man very humbly.

Then the man with the large ears noticed Neville for the first time.
He frowned darkly, and his big ears seemed to flap with annoyance.

"Who is this on our Cloud Horse?" he roared in his great angry voice.

"Just a little boy," said the yellow man--for Neville was far too
frightened to speak. "Just a little boy that the Cloud Horse has been
playing tricks on. I think he'd like to be getting home--just over by
the bald hill, if you don't mind, sir."

"Certainly not!" shouted the man with the large ears. "The Cloud Horse
is not to go out there again to-night, nor the silly little boy
either. I'm not going to have the sunset upset by any such silly
nonsense. You mind what I say and attend to your work."

And, without another glance at Neville, the man with the large ears
strode off to arrange for the sunset on the next range, miles and
miles away.

Neville gazed at the wee yellow man hopelessly, and the wee yellow man
gazed at Neville, and neither spoke a word until the man with the
large ears was well out of the way. Then the Last Sunbeam grew quite
cheerful again.

"Well," said he, "you heard what the head scene-shifter said. You
certainly can't go home by the way you came. The only thing for you to
do is to go round. You'll just about have time to do it, if you
hurry."

"Go round?" repeated Neville in a puzzled voice. "Go round what, round
where?"

"Round the world, of course," replied the little yellow man.

"Round the world?" cried Neville. "Why you must be making fun of me,
and I think that is very unkind."

"Not a bit of it," laughed the little yellow man. "You need not make
such as fuss about it. Why, I go round the world once every day with
the sunset. You have only to go a bit faster so as to do it in a few
minutes, and with the Cloud Horse to help you that's easily managed.
Don't you worry about the Cloud Horse. He has got to do just whatever I
tell him. Now, excuse me for one moment and I'll give you full
directions."

With that the wee yellow man went behind a pink cloud and came
back with a beautiful blue flower in his hand.

"This," he said, handing the flower to Neville, "is a Sky Flower. It
is made entirely out of a genuine piece of sky, and it is a
talisman--that's a longer word for charm, you know--which takes you
free round the world. The one thing you have to remember is that you
mustn't, on any account, lose that flower until you get home again.
Now, just exactly what you have to do is to travel West and race round
the world until you catch up with this evening again. It is quite
simple."

"Simple!" cried Neville. "Why I don't understand it at all."

"Dear me!" said the wee yellow man rather impatiently, "you are very
dense. Now listen carefully. The world, you know, turns round from
West to East, and that makes it seem as if the sun is going round the
world from East to West. Very well. So what you have to do is to ride
West upon the Cloud horse much faster than the sun appears to travel,
and catch him up again before he gets well away from here. The Cloud
horse is in good condition, and you should easily do it in a few
minutes."

"A few minutes!" gasped Neville.

"Keep quiet and listen," snapped the wee yellow man. "A few miles West
from here you will come into broad daylight. That will be afternoon.
After that you will meet mid-day, and, passing that, you will reach
the place where it is only dawn. That's about half-way round the
earth. Show the Sky Flower to the porter of the Dawn, and he will let
you through. Then you get to the half of the world where it is night,
and you must race round that till you reach the place where it is only
evening. That will be THIS evening, somewhere about here, for you will
have taken only a few minutes altogether. And when you see your own
home or the bald hill again, grasp the Sky Flower tightly in your
hand, jump off the Cloud horse, and you will float gracefully down to
the earth. It won't hurt you. Then you can go home, and I hope you
will not be late for dinner."

"But," began Neville, "I can't understand--"

"My time is valuable," said the wee yellow man, as he shook hands.
"Good-bye, and a pleasant journey." With that he smacked the Cloud
Horse smartly on the flank, and in a moment it was racing into the
West at a most terrific pace.

Of course, now that aeroplanes have been invented, flying is not
thought so wonderful as once it was. But loafing along through the air
in a biplane or a monoplane at eighty or a hundred miles an hour is a
very tame business when you compare it with racing the day round the
world on a Cloud horse. And Neville is very probably the only person
who has ever done that yet.

Almost before he knew what had happened, he had left evening far
behind and was riding in broad daylight. The cloud Horse had ridden
high in the air, and Neville saw the broad country, with plains and
hills and forest lands, stretched far beneath him. An instant later,
and the land was no longer below him, but the wide sea, sparkling in
brilliant sunlight.

Before he had time to notice very much he had reached mid-day, high
over a strange foreign land, and was racing through the morning toward
the dawn. So quickly did he go that there was little chance of seeing
anything clearly; but he had glimpses of many strange sights. Many
ships he saw upon the sea--small ships and stately steamers crawling
over the ocean like strange water-beetles. Once, as the Cloud Horse
drifted low, Neville saw a beautiful sailing-ship, with all sails set,
and strange-looking men upon the deck. They looked very like pirates,
and perhaps they were; but Neville had no time to make sure, for the
very next minute he was over a wild land where he saw a horde of black
men, with spears and clubs, hunting an elephant through a clearing in
a great jungle. As he looked, the elephant turned to charge the
hunters; but what happened then Neville did not see, for in a moment
more he was above a great city with crowds of people in the
streets--people dressed in strange, bright-coloured clothes--and there
were bells ringing and whistles blowing. Then a great desert spread
beneath him, with no living thing in sight but a great tawny lion
prowling over the sand. Then came the sea again, and more ships; and
the light began to grow dim, for he was nearly half-way round the
earth, and was approaching the dawn.

Dimmer grew the light, and dimmer yet, just as though evening were
coming--and before him, Neville saw the dawn like a silvery gateway in
the sky. Straight toward it the Cloud Horse rushed, and stopped so
suddenly that Neville almost fell off.

"What's all this? What's all this?" cried a small voice; and Neville
saw beside the silver gateway, a little man dressed from top to toe in
silver grey. It was the Porter of the Dawn, sometimes called the First
Sunbeam.

Before Neville could answer, the little grey man had caught sight of
the Sky Flower.

"Ah, you have the talisman," said he. "Pass in! and don't stop to
gossip, because I'm very busy this morning. A pleasant journey," he
added as he smacked the cloud horse on the shoulder; and in an instant
Neville had passed through the dawn and plunged into the night.

It was a dark night, with no moon, for the sky was overcast with dense
clouds. Above these the Cloud horse flew, and overhead Neville saw the
rushing stars, and below only the blackness of heavy clouds. But more
often the Cloud horse flew low, and then there was little to be seen.
By the lights of moving ships Neville knew that sometimes he was above
the sea. Sometimes twinkling lights in towns or solitary farms, or the
sudden blaze of a great city told him that the land was beneath him.
Once, through the blackness, he saw a great forest fire upon an
island, and the light of it lit up the sea, and showed the natives
crowded upon the beach and in the shallows, and some making off in
canoes.

Then darkness swallowed the Cloud Horse again, and the blazing island
was left far behind.

After that, Neville began to feel a little drowsy. Perhaps he did
sleep a little, for the next thing he saw was a faint light in the sky
before him, as though the dawn were coming. But he knew it must be the
evening, because he was coming back to the place from which he had
started, and was catching up with the sun. You see, he had only been
gone a few minutes.

The Cloud Horse flew very low now; and rapidly the darkness grew less.
Then, long before he expected it, Neville saw the roof of his own home
below him. He could see the garden in the twilight and his own dog
sniffing about among the trees as though in search of him.

Neville began to think about jumping now, and he was rather nervous.
He might land softly and he might not. He only had the wee yellow
man's word for that.

Then, to his horror, he saw that they had passed his home and were
over the bald hill. There was no time to lose. The Cloud Horse was
taking him into the sunset again, and, if he did, what would the head
scene-shifter say then?

So, grasping the Sky Flower very tightly, Neville closed his eyes and
jumped. He half expected to fall quickly and be dashed to pieces upon
the earth; but, instead, he floated in the air like a feather, swaying
and drifting, and slowly sinking all the time towards the ground. It
was a very pleasant sensation indeed.

The bald hill was beneath him as he came slowly down, down, down.

He could see the Cloud Horse--now little more than a small white
speck--rushing on to catch the sunset. And still he sank down ever so
slowly towards the top of the bald hill.

His little dog had caught sight of him now, and came rushing out the
gate and up the bald hill, barking loudly. And he kept on sinking
nearer to the earth, down, down, nearer and nearer--and then, quite
suddenly, he seemed to forget everything.

The next thing Neville remembered was feeling something wet and warm
upon his cheek. He opened his eyes and saw that the little dog was
licking his face. Sitting up, he looked about him. He was in the grass
on the top of the bald hill; night was very near, and the first star
was just beginning to twinkle.

Then, quite suddenly, Neville remembered the Cloud horse and the
little yellow man and the little silver man and the head scene-shifter
and the wonderful journey and all the rest of it.

"Well, what a remarkable dream," said Neville, stretching his arms.
And, as he did so, the Sky Flower fell from his hand.

So it was not a dream after all; for, if it was, how could he explain
that Sky Flower? He picked it up and carried it very tenderly, as he
set off home to dinner, his little dog trotting at his heels.

"What a beautiful flower!" said Neville's mother when he got home.
"Where ever did you get it?"

"It is a piece of the genuine sky," said Neville proudly, as he gave
it to her.

His mother smiled at him as she said, "That is a very nice thing to
say, and it certainly does look like a little piece of the sky. But,
of course, it couldn't possibly be a real piece."

Then Neville knew that if he were to tell the story of his wonderful
ride, and tried to explain that he had been right around the world
since since he went out to play, his parents would find it very, very
hard to believe. So he said nothing, but ate a very good dinner.

But Neville's mother put the flower in a vase upon the mantel; and to
this day it is still there, as fresh and bright as ever. It will not
fade. Neville's mother thinks that is a very strange and wonderful
thing. And so it is.

Since that day, when Neville goes to the top of the bald hill to watch
a sunset, he is almost sure that, just as the golden light is fading,
he can see a little yellow man by the gateway; and it seems to him
that the little yellow man waves a cheery greeting. But, whether this
is so or not, Neville always waves back; and he feels very happy to
think that he has a good friend inside the sunset.



THE TRAM-MAN

I'd like to be a Tram-man, and ride about all day,
Calling out, "Fares, please!" in quite a 'ficious way,
With pockets full of pennies which I'd make the people pay.
But in the hottest days I'd take my tram down to the Bay;
And when I saw the nice cool sea I'd shout "Hip, hip, hooray!"
But I wouldn't be a Tram-man if. . . .
               I couldn't stop and play.
                                   Would you?



THE AXE-MAN

High on the hills, where the tall trees grow,
There lives an axeman that I know.
From his little hut by a ferny creek,
Day after day, week after week,
He goes each morn with his shining axe,
Trudging along by the forest tracks;
And he chops and he chops     till the daylight goes--
High on the hills, where the blue-gum grows.

(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip! . . Chop!)
There's a log to move and a branch to lop.
Now to the felling!  His sharp axe bites
Into a tree on the forest heights,
And scarce for a breath does the axeman stop--
(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip! . . Chop!)
Bell-birds watch him; and in the fern
Wallabies listen awhile, and turn
Back through the bracken, and off they hop.
(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip! . . Chop!)
Patient and tireless, blow on blow
The axeman swings as the minutes go;
While the echoes ring from the mountain-top.
(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip! . . Chop!)

Round about him the rabbits play,
Skipping and scampering all the day,
And the sweet young grass by the logs they crop.
(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip! . . Chop!)

Crimson parrots above him climb,
Chattering, chattering all the time,
As down from the branches the twigs they drop.
(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip!          Chop!)
Steadily, surely, on he goes,
Shaking the tree with his mighty blows:
There's never a pause and there's never a stop.
(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip! . . Chop!)

Out from the bush beyond is heard
The swaggering song of the butcher-bird
Seeking a joint for his butcher's shop.
(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip! . . Chop!)
Deeper and deeper the cut creeps in,
While the parrots shriek with a deafening din,
And the chips fly out with a flip and a flop.
(Chip!     Chop!       Chip!      Chop!)
Yellow robins come  flocking round,
Watching the chips  as they fall to ground,
Darting to catch the grubs that drop.
(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip!    . . Chop!)

The blows come quicker. The   axe-biade hums,
Stand well back, there, before she comes!
Hark! How the splinters crack and pop--
(Chip! . . Chop! . . Chip! . . Chop!)
Listen!  Listen!  She's creaking now!
Look, high up, at that trembling bough!
Another second, and down she'll smash,
Shaking the earth with a mighty crash;
Look at her! Look at her! (Chip!      Chop!
Chip! . . . . . . . .Chip!)
               Wee--E--E--E--E--E---
                                                FLOP!



THE DROVERS

Out across the spinifex, out across the sand,
Out across the saltbush to Never Never land
   That's the way the drovers go, jogging down the track--
   That's the way the drovers go. But how do they come back?
Back across the saltbush from Never Never land.
Back across the spinifex, back across the sand.



THE LONG ROAD HOME

When I go back from Billy's place I always have to roam
The mazy road, the crazy road that leads the long way home.
Ma always says, "Why don't you come through Mr Donkin's land?
The footbridge track will bring you back." Ma doesn't understand.
I cannot go that way, you know, because of Donkin's dog;
So I set forth and travel north, and cross the fallen log.

Last week, when I was coming by, that log had lizards in it;
And you can't say I stop to play if I just search a minute.
I look around upon the ground and, if there are no lizards,
I go right on and reach the turn in front of Mrs Blizzard's.
I do not seek to cross the creek, because it's deep and floody,
And Ma would be annoyed with me if I came home all muddy.

Perhaps I throw a stone or so at Mrs Blizzard's tank,
Because it's great when I aim straight to hear the stone go "Plank!"
Then west I wend from Blizzard's Bend, and not a moment wait,
Except, perhaps, at Mr Knapp's, to swing upon his gate.
So up the hill I go, until I reach the little paddock
That Mr Jones at present owns and rents to Mr Craddock.

For boys my size the sudden rise is quite a heavy pull,
And yet I fear a short-cut here because of Craddock's bull;
So I just tease the bull till he's as mad as he can get,
And then I face the corner place that's been so long to let.
It's very well for Ma to tell about my dawdling habits.
What would you do, suppose you knew the place was thick with rabbits?

I do not stay for half a day, as Ma declares I do.
No, not for more than half-an-hour--perhaps an hour--or two.
Then down the drop I run, slip-slop, where all the road is slithy.
And have to go quite close, you know, to Mr Horner's smithy.
A moment I might tarry by the fence to watch them hammer,
And, I must say, learn more that way than doing sums and grammar.

And, if I do sometimes climb through, I do not mean to linger.
Though I did stay awhile the day Bill Homer burst his finger.
I just stand there to see the pair bang some hot iron thing
And watch Bill Horner swing the sledge and hit the anvil--Bing!
(For Mr Horner and his son are great big brawny fellows:
Both splendid chaps!) And then, perhaps, they let me blow the bellows.

A while I stop beside the shop, and talk to Mr Horner;
Then off I run, and race like fun around by Duggan's Corner.
It's getting late, and I don't wait beside the creek a minute,
Except to stop, maybe, and drop a few old pebbles in it.
A few yards more, and here's the store that's kept by Mr Whittle--
And you can't say I waste the day if I 'ust wait . . .  a little.

One day, you know, a year ago, a man gave me a penny,
And Mr Whittle sold me sweets (but not so very many).
You never know your luck, and so I look to see what's new
In Mr Whittle's window.  There's a peppermint or two,
Some buttons and tobacco (Mr Whittle calls it "baccy"),
And fish in tins, and tape, and pins. . . . And then a voice calls, "Jacky!"

"I'm coming, Ma.  I've been so far-around by Duggan's Corner.
I had to stay awhile to say 'Good day' to Mr Horner.
I feel so fagged; I've tramped and dragged through mud and over logs, Ma--
I could not go short-cuts, you know, because of bulls and dogs, Ma.
The creek, Ma? Why, it's very high! You don't call that a gutter?
Bill Horner chews tobacco, Ma . . . . I'd like some bread and butter."



THE BAND

Hey, there!  Listen awhile!  Listen awhile, and come.
Down in the street there are marching feet, and I hear the beat of a drum.
Bim!  Boom!!  Out of the room!  Pick up your hat and fly!
Isn't it grand?  The band!  The band!  The band is marching by!

Oh, the clarinet is the finest yet, and the uniforms are gay.
     Tah, rah!  We don't go home--
     Oom, pah!  We won't go home--
Oh, we shan't go home, and we can't go home when the band begins to play.

Oh, see them swinging along, swinging along the street!
Left, right! buttons so bright, jackets and caps so neat.
Ho, the Fire Brigade, or a dress parade of the Soldier-men is grand;
But everyone, for regular fun, wants a Big-Brass-Band.

The slide-trombone is a joy alone, and the drummer!  He's a treat!
     So, Rackety-rumph!  We don't go home--
     Boom, Bumph!  We won't go home--
Oh, we shan't go home, and we can't go home while the band is in the street.
     Tooral-ooral, Oom-pah!
                                 The band is in the street!



BESSIE AND THE BUNYIP

   Bessie met a bunyip down along the track,
In his hand a billy and a swag upon his back.
      And you will hardly believe it, but when Bessie shouted,"Shoo!"
      He turned a double somersault and went quite blue.



GOOD ENOUGH

I do not think there ever was,
   Or ever will, or ever could be,
A little girl or little boy
   As good as she or as he should be.

But still, I think, you will agree,
   Though perfect very, very few are,
They're not so bad when "pretty good"--
   That's just about as good as you are.



THE PORTER

I'd like to be a porter, and always on the run,
Calling out, "Stand aside!" and asking leave of none.
Shoving trucks on people's toes, and having splendid fun,
Slamming all the carriage doors and locking every one--
And, when they asked to be let in, I'd say, "It can't be done."
   But I wouldn't be a porter if . . . 
      The luggage weighed a ton.
         Would you?



GROWING UP

Little Tommy Tadpole began to weep and wail,
For little Tommy Tadpole had lost his little tail;
   And his mother didn't know him as he wept upon a log,
   For he wasn't Tommy Tadpole, but Mr. Thomas Frog.



THE UNSOCIABLE WALLABY

Willie spied a wallaby hopping through the fern--
Here a jump, here a thump, there a sudden turn.
   Willie called the wallaby, begging him to stop,
   But he went among the wattles with a
                           flip,
                                   flap,
                                            flop!



* * *

I wonder whether, all together, you and I and father
Could eat a bun that weighs a ton. I'd like to try it, rather.

I want to know why roosters crow at dawning of the day.
Is it because they cannot think of something else to say?

* * *



THE SONG OF THE SULKY STOCKMAN

Come, let us sing with a right good ring
   (Sing hey for lifting lay, sing hey!)
Of any old, sunny old, silly old thing.
   (Sing ho for the ballad of a backblock day!)
The sun shone brightly overhead,
And the shearers stood by the shearing shed;
But "The run wants rain," the stockman said
(Sing di-dum, wattle-gum, Narrabori Ned.
For a lifting lay sing hey!)

The colts were clipped and the sheep were shorn
   (Sing hey for a lilting lay, sing hey!)
But the stockman stood there all forlorn.
   (Sing ho for the ballad of a backblock day!)
The rails were up and the gate was tied,
And the big black bull was safe inside;
But "The wind's gone West!" the stockman sighed
(Sing, di-dum, wattle-gum, rally for a ride.
   For a lifting lay sing hey!)

The cook came out as the clock struck one
   (Sing hey for a lilting lay, sing hey!)
And the boundary rider got his gun.
   (Sing ho for the ballad of a backblock day!)
He fired it once at an old black crow;
But the shot went wide, for he aimed too low;
And the stockman said, "Fat stock is low."
(Sing, di-dum, wattle-gum, Jerridiiii Joe.
   For a lifting lay sing hey!)

They spread their swags in the gum-tree's shade
   (Sing hey for a lilting lay, sing hey!)
For the work was done and the cheques were paid.
   (Sing ho for the ballad of a backblock day!)
The overseer rode in at three,
But his horse pulled back and would not gee,
And the stockman said, "We're up a tree!"
(Sing, di-dum, wattle-gum, Johnny-cake for tea.
   For a lilting lay sing hey!)

The sun sank down and the stars shone out
   (Sing hey for a lifting lay, sing hey!)
And the old book-keeper moped about.
   (Sing ho for the ballad of a backblock day!)
The dingo wailed to the mopoke's call,
The crazy colt stamped in his stall;
But the stockman groaned, "it's bunk for all."
(Sing, di-dum, wattle-gum, wattle-gum, wattle-gum,
   Hey for a backblock day!
        Sing hey!
   Sing hey for a lifting lay!)



OUR COW

Down by the sliprails stands our cow
   Chewing, chewing, chewing,
She does not care what folks out there
   In the great, big world are doing.
She sees the small cloud-shadows pass
   And green grass shining under.
If she does think, what does she think
   About it all, I wonder?

She sees the swallows skimming by
   Above the sweet young clover,
The light reeds swaying in the wind
   And tall trees bending over.
Far down the track she hears the crack
   of bullock-whips, and raving
Of angry men where, in the sun,
   Her fellow-beasts are slaving.

Girls, we are told, can scratch and scold,
   And boys will fight and wrangle,
And big, grown men, just now and then,
   Fret o'er some fingle-fangle,
Vexing the earth with grief or mirth,
   Longing, rejoicing, rueing--
But by the sliprails stands our cow,
   Chewing.



THE TEACHER

I'd like to be a teacher, and have a clever brain,
Calling out, "Attention, please!" and "Must I speak in vain?"
I'd be quite strict with boys and girls whose minds I had to train,
And all the books and maps and things I'd carefully explain;
I'd make then learn the dates of kings, and all the capes of Spain;
   But I wouldn't be a teacher if . . . 
      I couldn't use the cane.
         Would you?



THE SPOTTED HEIFERS

Mr Jeremiah Jeffers
Owned a pair of spotted heifers
These he sold for two pounds ten
To Mr Robert Raymond Wren

Who reared them in the lucerne paddocks
Owned by Mr Martin Maddox,
And sold them, when they grew to cows,
To Mr Donald David Dowse.

A grazier, Mr Egbert Innes,
Bought them then for twenty guineas,
Milked the cows, and sold the milk
To Mr Stephen Evan Silk.

Who rents a butter factory
From Mr Laurence Lampard-Lee.
Here, once a week, come for his butter
The grocer, Mr Roland Rutter,

Who keeps a shop in Sunny Street
Next door to Mr Peter Peat.
He every afternoon at two
Sent his fair daughter, Lucy Loo,

To Mr Rutter's shop to buy
Such things as were not priced too high,
Especially a shilling tin
Of "Fuller's Food for Folk Too Thin."

This food was bought for Lucy Loo--
A girl of charming manners, who
Was much too pale and much too slight
To be a very pleasant sight.

When Lucy Loo beheld the butter
Stocked by Mr Roland Rutter,
She said, "I'll have a pound of that."
She had it, and thenceforth grew fat.

We now go back to Mr Jeffers,
Who sold the pair of spotted heifers.
He had a son, James Edgar John,
A handsome lad to gaze upon,

Who had now reached that time of life
When young men feel they need a wife;
But no young girl about the place
Exactly had the kind of face

That seemed to suit James Edgar John--
A saddening thing to think upon,
For he grew sad and sick of life
Because he could not find a wife.

One day young James was passing by
(A look of sorrow in his eye)
The shop of Mr Roland Rutter,
When Lucy Loo came out with butter.

At once James Edgar John said, "That
Is just the girl for me!  She's fat."
He offered her his heart and hand
And prospects of his father's land.

The Reverend Saul Sylvester Slight
Performed the simple marriage rite.
The happy couple went their way,
And lived and loved unto this day.

Events cannot be far foreseen;
And all ths joy might not have been
If Mr Jeremiah Jeffers
Had kept his pair of spotted heifers.



TEA TALK

'Excuse me if I sit on you,' the cup said to the saucer.
   'I fear I've been here all the afternoon.'
'Spare excuses,' said the saucer; 'you have sat on me before, sir.'
   'Oh, I'll stir him up directly,' said the spoon.
'Stop your clatter!  Stop your clatter!' cried the bread-and-butter platter
   'Tittle-tattle!' sneered the tea-pot, with a shrug;
'Now, the most important question is my chronic indigestion.'
   'Ah, you've taken too much tannin,' jeered the jug.
'Hey, hey, hey!' sang the silver-plated tray,
'It's time you had your faces washed.  I've come to clear away!'



THE LOOKING-GLASS

When I look into the looking glass
   I'm always sure to see--
No matter how I dodge about--
   Me, looking out at me.

I often wonder as I look,
   And those strange features spy,
If I, in there, think I'm as plain
   As I, out here, think I.



WOOLLOOMOOLOO

Here's a ridiculous riddle for you:
   How many o's are there in Woolloomooloo?
Two for the W, two for the m,
  Four for the l's, and that's plenty for them.



* * *

I wonder what the Jacks have got to laugh and laugh about
I'm sure the worms don't see the joke when Jacky digs them out.

I wonder which is best: a rich plum-pudding stuffed with plums,
Or lemon ice, or plain boiled rice, or long-division sums.

* * *



THE BARBER

I'd like to be a barber, and learn to shave and clip,
Calling out, "Next please!" and pocketing my tip.
All day I'd hear my scissors going, "Snip, Snip, Snip;"
I'd lather people's faces, and their noses I would grip
While I shaved most carefully along the upper lip.
   But I wouldn't be a barber if . . . 
      The razor was to slip.
         Would you?



FARMER JACK

Old farmer Jack gazed on his wheat,
   And feared the frost would nip it.
Said he, "it's nearly seven feet--
   I must begin to strip it."

He stripped it with a stripper and
   He bagged it with a bagger;
The bags were all so lumpy that
   They made the lumper stagger.

The lumper staggered up the stack
   Where he was told to stack it;
And Jack was paid and put the cash
   Inside his linen jacket.



OLD BLACK JACKO

Old Black Jacko
   Smokes tobacco
   In his little pipe of clay.
Puff, puff, puff,
He never has enough
   Though he smokes it all day.

But his lubra says, "Mine tink dat Jacky
Him shmoke plenty too much baccy."



BIRD SONG

I detest the Carrion Crow!
(He's a raven, don't you know?)
   He's a greedy glutton, also, and a ghoul,
And his sanctimonious caw
Rubs my temper on the raw.
   He's a demon, and a most degraded fowl.

I admire the pert Blue-wren
And his dainty little hen--
   Though she hasn't got a trace of blue upon her;
But she's pleasing, and she's pretty,
   And she sings a cheerful ditty;
While her husband is a gentleman of honour.

I despise the Pallid Cuckoo,
A disreputable "crook" who
   Shirks her duties for a lazy life of ease.
I abhor her mournful call,
Which is not a song at all
   But a cross between a whimper and a wheeze.



THE SAILOR

I'd like to be a sailor--a sailor bold and bluff--
Calling out, "Ship ahoy!" in manly tones and gruff.
I'd learn to box the compass, and to reef and tack and luff;
I'd sniff and snifff the briny breeze and never get enough.
Perhaps I'd chew tobacco, or an old black pipe I'd puff,
   But I wouldn't be a sailor if . . . 
      The sea was very rough.
         Would you?



THE FAMINE

Cackle and lay, cackle and lay!
How many eggs did you get to-day?
None in the manger, and none in the shed,
None in the box where the chickens are fed,
None in the tussocks and none in the tub,
And only a little one out in the scrub.
Oh, I say!  Dumplings to-day.
I fear that the hens must be laying away.



THE FEAST

Cackle and lay, cackle and lay!
How many eggs did you get to-day?
Two in the manger, and four in the shed,
Six in the box where the chickens are fed,
Two in the tussocks and ten in the tub,
And nearly two dozen right out in the scrub.
Hip, hooray!  Pudding to-day!
I think that the hens are beginning to lay.



UPON THE ROAD TO ROCKABOUT

Upon the road to Rockabout
I came upon some sheep--
A large and woolly flock about
As wide as it was deep.

I was about to turn about
To ask the man to tell
Some things I wished to learn about
Both sheep and wool as well,

When I beheld a rouseabout
Who lay upon his back
Beside a little house about
A furlong from the track.

I had a lot to talk about,
And said to him "Good day."
But he got up to walk about,
And so I went away--



A CHANGE OF AIR

Now, a man in Oodnadatta
He grew fat, and he grew fatter,
   Though he hardly had a thing to eat for dinner;
While a man in Booboorowie
Often sat and wondered how he
   Could prevent himself from growing any thinner.

So the man from Oodnadatta
   He came down to Booboorowie,
Where he rapidly grew flatter;
   And the folk will tell you how he
Urged the man from Booboorowie
   To go up to Oodnadatta--
Where he lived awhile, and now he
   Is considerably fatter.



POLLY DIBBS

Mrs Dibbs--Polly Dibbs,
   Standing at a tub,
Washing other people's clothes--
   Rub-Rub-Rub.
Poor, old, skinny arms
   White with soapy foam--
At night she takes her shabby hat
   And goes off home.

Mrs Dibbs--Polly Dibbs--
   Is not very rich.
She goes abroad all day to scrub,
   And home at night to stitch.
She wears her shabby hat awry,
   Perched on a silly comb;
And people laugh at Polly Dibbs
   As she goes home.

Mrs Dibbs--Mother Dibbs--
   Growing very old,
Says, "it's a hard world!"
   And sniffs and drats the cold.
She says it is a cruel world,
   A weary world to roam.
But God will smile on Polly Dibbs
   When she goes Home.



* * *

I suspect the Kookaburra,
For his methods are not thorough
In his highly praised campaign against the snakes.
And the small birds, one and all,
Curse him for a cannibal--
Though he certainly is cheerful when he wakes.

* * *



LULLABY

You are much too big to dandle,
And I will not leave the candle.
   Go to sleep.
You are growing naughty, rather,
And I'll have to speak to father.
   Go to sleep!
If you're good I shall not tell, then.
Oh, a story?  Very well, then.
   Once upon a time, a king, named Crawley Creep,
Had a very lovely daughter . . . .
You don't want a drink of water!
   Go to sleep! There! There! Go to sleep.



* * *

I wonder why I wear a tie. It is not warm to wear;
But if I left it off someone would say it was not there.

I wonder, if I took a whiff of father's pipe for fun,
Would I be big and strong like him, or just his small, sick son?

I wonder when our old white hen will know her squawk betrays her.
I think she lets us find her eggs just so that we shall praise her.

* * *



THE PUBLISHER

I'd like to be a publisher, And publish massive tomes
Written in a massive style by blokes with massive domes--
Science books, and histories of Egypt's day and Rome's,
Books of psycho-surgery to mine the minds of momes,
And solemn pseudo-psychic stuff to tell where Topsy roams
When her poor clay is put away beneath the spreading holms;
Books about electrocuting little seeds with ohms
To sternly show them how to grow in sands, and clays, and loams,
And bravely burst infinitives, like angry agronomes;
Books on breeding aeroplanes and airing aerodromes,
On bees that buzz in bonnets and the kind that build the combs,
Made plain with pretty pictures done in crimsons, mauves, and chromes;
And diagrams to baulk the brain of Mr. Sherlock Holmes.
I'd set the scientists to work like superheated gnomes,
And make them write and write and write until the printer foams
And lino men, made "loony", go to psychopathic homes.
I'd publish books, I would--large books on ants and antinomes
And palimpsests and palinodes and pallid pallindromes:
   But I wouldn't be a publisher if . . . .
               I got many "pomes."
                                 Would you?



GOOD NIGHT

And so, Good Night. I'm rather tired.
I hardly thought I'd be required
   To draw a lot of pictures, too,
   When I arranged to write for you.
I found it hard, but did my best;
And now I need a little rest.
   If you are pleased, why, that's all right.
   I'm rather tired. And so

           GOOD NIGHT!



This very charming gentleman, extremely old and gruff,
He slowly shook his head and took a great big pinch of snuff,
Then he spluttered and he muttered and he loudly shouted "Fie!
To tear your books is wicked sir! and likewise all my eye!"
I don't know what he meant by that. He had such piercing eyes.
And, he said, "Mark--ME--boy! Books will make you wise."

This very charming gentleman said, "Hum," and "Hoity, Toit!
A book is not a building block, a cushion or a quoit.
Soil your books and spoil your books? Is that the thing to do?
Gammon, sir! and Spinach, sir! And Fiddle-faddle, too!"
He blinked so quick, and thumped his stick, then gave me such a stare.
And he said, "Mark--ME--boy! BOOKS--NEED--CARE!"



THE END

*THE SANDMAN’S HOUR*



[Illustration: Headpiece to Where the Sparks Go]


                         *WHERE THE SPARKS GO*


One night when the wind was blowing and it was clear and cold out of
doors, a cat and a dog, who were very good friends, sat dozing before a
fire-place.  The wood was snapping and crackling, making the sparks fly.
Some flew up the chimney, others settled into coals in the bed of the
fireplace, while others flew out on the hearth and slowly closed their
eyes and went to sleep.

One spark ventured farther out upon the hearth and fell very near Pussy.
This made her jump, which awakened the dog.

"That almost scorched your fur coat, Miss Pussy," said the dog.

"No, indeed," answered the cat.  "I am far too quick to be caught by
those silly sparks."

"Why do you call them silly?" asked the dog.  "I think them very good to
look at, and they help to keep us warm."

"Yes, that is all true," said the cat, "but those that fly up the
chimney on a night like this certainly are silly, when they could be
warm and comfortable inside; for my part, I cannot see why they fly up
the chimney."

The spark that flew so near Pussy was still winking, and she blazed up a
little when she heard the remark the cat made.

"If you knew our reason you would not call us silly," she said.  "You
cannot see what we do, but if you were to look up the chimney and see
what happens if we are fortunate enough to get out at the top, you would
not call us silly."

The dog and cat were very curious to know what happened, but the spark
told them to look and see for themselves.  Pussy was very cautious and
told the dog to look first, so he stepped boldly up to the fireplace and
thrust his head in.  He quickly withdrew it, for his hair was singed,
which made him cry and run to the other side of the room.

Miss Pussy smoothed her soft coat and was very glad she had been so
wise; she walked over to the dog and urged him to come nearer the fire,
but he realized why a burnt child dreads the fire, and remained at a
safe distance.

Pussy walked back to the spark and continued to question it.  "We cannot
go into the fire," she said. "Now, pretty, bright spark, do tell us what
becomes of you when you fly up the chimney.  I am sure you only become
soot and that cannot make you long to get to the top."

"Oh, you are very wrong," said the spark.  "We are far from being black
when we fly up the chimney, for once we reach the top, we live forever
sparkling in the sky.  You can see, if you look up the chimney, all of
our brothers and sisters, who have been lucky and reached the top,
winking at us almost every night. Sometimes the wind blows them away, I
suppose, for there are nights when we cannot see the sparks shine."

"Who told you all that?" said the cat.  "Did any of the sparks ever come
back and tell you they could live forever?"

"Oh no!" said the spark; "but we can see them, can we not?  And, of
course, we all want to shine forever."

"I said you were silly," said the cat, "and now I know it; those are not
sparks you see; they are stars in the sky."

"You can call them anything you like," replied the spark, "but we make
the bright light you see."

"Well, if you take my advice," said the cat, "you will stay right in the
fireplace, for once you reach the top of the chimney out of sight you
go.  The stars you see twinkling are far above the chimney, and you
never could reach them."  But the spark would not be convinced.  Just
then some one opened a door and the draught blew the spark back into the
fireplace. In a few minutes it was flying with the others toward the top
of the chimney.

Pussy watched the fire a minute and then looked at the dog.

"The spark may be right, after all," said the dog. "Let us go out and
see if we can see it."

Pussy stretched herself and blinked.  "Perhaps it is true," she replied;
"anyway, I will go with you and look."




[Illustration: Headpiece to The Good Sea Monster]


                         *THE GOOD SEA MONSTER*


On an island of rocks out in the ocean lived a sea monster.  His head
was large, and when he opened his mouth it looked like a cave.

It had been said that he was so huge that he could swallow a ship, and
that on stormy nights he sat on the rocks and the flashing of his eyes
could be seen for miles around.

The sailors spoke of him with fear and trembling, but, as you can see,
the sea monster had really been a friend to them, showing them the rock
in the storm by flashing his eyes; but because he looked so hideous all
who beheld him thought he must be a cruel monster.

One night there was a terrible storm, and the monster went out into the
ocean to see if any ship was wrecked in the night, and, if possible,
help any one that was floating about.

He found one little boy floating about on a plank. His name was Ko-Ko,
and when he saw the monster he was afraid, but when Ko-Ko saw that the
monster did not attempt to harm him he climbed on the monster’s back and
he took him to the rocky island. Then the monster went back into the sea
and Ko-Ko wondered if he were to be left alone.  But after a while the
monster returned and opened his mouth very wide.

Ko-Ko ran when he saw the huge mouth, for he thought the monster
intended to swallow him, but as he did not follow him Ko-Ko went back.

The monster opened his mouth again, and Ko-Ko asked, "Do you want me to
go inside?" and the monster nodded his head.

"It must be for my own good," said Ko-Ko, "for he could easily swallow
me if he wished, without waiting for me to walk in."

So Ko-Ko walked into the big mouth and down a dark passage, but what the
monster wanted him to do he could not think.  He could see very faintly
now, and after a while he saw a stove, a chair, and a table. "I will
take these out," said Ko-Ko, "for I am sure I can use them."

He took them to a cave on the island, and when he returned the monster
was gone; but he soon returned, and again he opened his mouth.

Ko-Ko walked in this time without waiting, and he found boxes and
barrels of food, which he stored away in the cave.  When Ko-Ko had
removed everything the monster lay down and went to sleep.

Ko-Ko cooked his dinner and then he awoke the monster and said, "Dinner
is ready," but the monster shook his head and plunged into the ocean.
He soon returned with his mouth full of fish.  Then Ko-Ko knew that the
monster had brought all the things from the sunken ship for him, and he
began to wish that the monster could talk, for he no longer feared him.

"I wish you could talk," he said.

"I can," the monster replied.  "No one ever wished it before.  An old
witch changed me into a monster and put me on this island, where no one
could reach me, and the only way I can be restored to my original form
is for some one to wish it."

"I wish it," said Ko-Ko.

"You have had your wish," said the monster, "and I can talk; but for me
to become a man some one else must wish it."

The monster and Ko-Ko lived for a long time on the island.  He took
Ko-Ko for long rides on his back, and when the waves were too high and
Ko-Ko was afraid the monster would open his mouth and Ko-Ko would crawl
inside and be brought back safe to the island.

One night, after a storm, Ko-Ko saw something floating on the water, and
he jumped on the monster’s back and they swam out to it.

It proved to be a little girl, about Ko-Ko’s age, who had been on one of
the wrecked vessels, and they brought her to the island.

At first she was afraid of the monster, but when she learned that he had
saved Ko-Ko as well as her and brought them all their food she became as
fond of him as Ko-Ko was.

"I wish he were a man," she said one day, as she sat on his back with
Ko-Ko, ready for a sail.  Splash went both children into the water, and
there in place of the monster was an old man.  He caught the children in
his arms and brought them to the shore.

"But what will we do for food, now that you are a man?" asked Ko-Ko.

"We shall want for nothing now," replied the old man.  "I am a sea-god
and can do many things, now that I have my own form again.  We will
change this island into a beautiful garden, and when the little girl and
you are grown up and married you shall have a castle, and all the
sea-gods and nymphs will care for you.  You will never want for anything
again.

"I will take you out on the ocean on the backs of my dolphins."

Ko-Ko and the little girl lived on the enchanted island, and all the
things that the old sea-god promised came true.




[Illustration: Headpiece to Mother Turkey and Her Chicks]


                     *MOTHER TURKEY AND HER CHICKS*


Mother Turkey believed in the old adage taught to her by her
grandmother, "The early bird catches the worm," and every night when the
sun set she took her little chicks to the highest branch they could
reach in an old apple-tree and sang them to sleep with this lullaby:

    "Close your eyes, my little turkey chicks;
      Hide your heads, don’t peep.
    Mother knows the bogy fox’s tricks,
      And she’ll watch while you sleep."


Mother Turkey had told them about the bogy fox that lived in a hole on
the other side of the hill, and it did not need more than the mention of
that name to make them obey.

"I do wish we could get just a look at him," said one chick, as his
mother came to the end of the verse. "I should not know him if I met
him."

"Oh yes, you would," replied his mother.  "He has a very long tail, and
a sharp nose, and his teeth! Oh, dear me!" she exclaimed, as she flapped
her wings at the thought of them.

"Will you wake us if he comes to-night?" asked another chick.

"I shall not need to do that," replied Mother Turkey; "you will hear us
talking.  He is a very sly fellow, and always very polite and says nice
things. But you cover your heads; it is getting late," and she began to
sing:

    "Close your eyes, my little turkey chicks;
      Hide your heads, don’t peep.
    Mother knows the bogy fox’s tricks,
      And she’ll watch while you sleep."


By the time Mother Turkey reached the end of the verse this time all the
chicks were fast asleep.

Mother Turkey stretched out her wings once or twice and turned her head
in all directions, and then she settled herself for a nap.

The moon was shining brightly when she awoke, and she saw not far off
what looked like a large black dog walking cautiously toward the tree.
Mother Turkey took another look and saw the bushy tail, and she perched
herself more firmly on the limb and looked to see if her children were
safe on there, too, for she knew that the bogy fox had come to take one
of her chicks back to his hole if he could.

"Good evening, Mr. Fox," she said, as the fox came near enough to hear
her.  "I was sure that I knew your splendid figure; you certainly make a
most remarkable picture in the moonlight."

Mr. Fox was somewhat taken aback at this compliment paid him in such a
pleasant manner, for usually he was the one to make remarks and the
turkeys listened, not daring to move or speak.

He recovered from his surprise by the time he was under the tree, and
said: "You are most flattering, Mistress Turkey, and I can only return
the compliment by telling you that you are a picture yourself in the
moonlight, sitting so stately on that limb, but if you would enjoy to
the full extent this beautiful evening you must come from the tree and
take a walk over the hill."

"No doubt you are right," replied Mrs. Turkey, "but I could not think of
leaving my children alone."

"I should be very glad to take care of the little dears while you are
gone," said Mr. Fox, "and if you will have them come down beside me I
will tell them a story which I am sure will keep them interested until
you return."

By this time the turkey chicks were awake and listening to what the fox
was saying.  He seemed so nice and polite that they quite forgot to be
afraid, and when he spoke of telling them a story one of them said: "Oh,
please do go, mother, and let him tell us a story.  We’ll be very good
if you will."

"You see, my dear madam," said the fox, "the little dears are quite
willing to stay with me.  Do go and enjoy the moonlight."

Mother Turkey looked at her children in a way that plainly said to them,
"Be quiet," and then she said to Mr. Fox: "I appreciate your kind offer,
and were my children well should be very glad to leave them with you,
but they have been sick, and are so lean that I have to be very careful
that they sleep and eat well, or they will not be fat by next
Thanksgiving, and that would be a disgrace, you know."

When the fox heard this he was not so anxious to have the chicks come
down, so he said, "I know just how anxious you must feel, Mistress
Turkey, and if you will come down where I can talk with you without
being heard I will tell you the very thing to give them to make them
fat."

"If he cannot get the chicks he will take me," thought Mrs. Turkey, "but
I am too old a bird to be caught even by this sly fellow."

Mrs. Turkey did not reply to this last remark. She was thinking of a
trap she saw her master set the day before.  "I wish you would walk
around a little so my children can see what a beautiful bushy tail you
have," she said.  "They have never seen so handsome a fellow as you
are."

Mr. Fox was very proud of his tail, so he walked out from the shade of
the tree and strutted about.

"Tell him how handsome he is," whispered Mother Turkey to her chicks.

"Oh, isn’t he handsome!" said one, and another said, "I wish we had such
bushy tails, instead of these straight feathers," while Mrs. Turkey
said, "You are quite the handsomest creature I have ever seen, and I
have seen many in my time."

By this time the fox was so pleased with their admiration that he was
ready to do anything to display his charms, so when Mrs. Turkey said, "I
wish you would run and show them how you can run and jump," he asked
what he could jump on to show his nimbleness.

"The top of that hogshead would be a good place," said Mrs. Turkey,
knowing well that the cask had no head and that it was nearly full of
water.

Away ran Mr. Fox, and splash he went into the hogshead.  He tried to get
out, but it was no use; the cask was too high, and then the farmer,
hearing the noise, came out and soon put an end to Mr. Fox.

The little turkeys sat wide-awake and trembling beside their mother, but
when the farmer went into the house she began to sing:

    "Close your eyes, my little turkey chicks;
      Hide your heads, don’t peep.
    Mother knows the bogy fox’s tricks,
      And she’ll watch while you sleep."


And in a few minutes all was quiet again in the yard.




[Illustration: headpiece to The Fairies and the Dandelion]


                    *THE FAIRIES AND THE DANDELION*


The Fairies say that a long time ago the dandelion did not have a yellow
blossom or the fluffy white cap it wears after the yellow has been taken
off.

They tell the story that one night, a long time ago, while they were
holding one of their revels in a field, sounds of weeping and moaning
were heard.

The Fairy Queen stopped the dance and listened. "It comes from the
ground," she said, "down among the grasses.  Hurry, all of you; find out
who is in trouble and come back and tell me."

Away went the Fairies into the fields and gardens and lanes.  Darting in
and out among the blades of grass, they found queer-looking weeds with
leaves resembling a lion’s tooth.  They were crying and chanting a
sing-song tune:

    "Here we grow so bright and green,
    The color of grass, and can’t be seen.
    O bitter woe, but we’ll not stop
    Till the Fairies give us a yellow top."


Back flew the Fairies to their Queen and told her what they had heard.

"If only they had asked for some other color!" she said.  "There are so
many yellow blossoms now. The buttercup, the goldenglow, and the
goldenrod will all be jealous if another yellow flower enters their
bright circle.  Go back and ask them if they will be quiet if we give
them a white top."

The Fairies danced away to the crying dandelions with the Queen’s
message.

"The Queen will give you a white top," they said.

"No, no!" they cried.  "Yellow is the color we should wear with our
green leaves.  It is the color of the sun and we wish to be as near like
him as we can," and they all began to cry:

    "O bitter woe, we will not stop
    Till the Fairies give us a yellow top."


They made such a noise that the Fairies put their fingers in their ears
as they flew back to the Queen.

The grass-blades stood up higher and looked about. "Do quiet those noisy
weeds," they said to the Queen; "give them the yellow top for which they
are crying, and let us go to sleep.  We have been kept awake since
sunset and it will soon be sunrise."

"What shall we do?" said the Queen.  "I do not know where to get the
yellow they want."

"If we could get some sunbeams," said one Fairy, "we could have just the
color they are crying for. Of course, we cannot venture into such a
strong light, but the Elves might gather them for us."

So they went to the Elves and asked them to gather the sunbeams for the
next day, and bring them to the valley the next night.

The Elves were very willing to help them, but the sun shone very little
the next day, and they were able to gather only a few basketfuls of the
bright golden color.

When the Queen saw the quantity she was in despair. "This will never go
around," she said, "and those that are left without a yellow top will
cry louder than ever."

"Why not divide it among them?" said one Fairy. "It will last for a
little while and we can give them our fluffy white caps when that is
gone.  We shall take them off soon and the dandelions can wear them the
rest of the season."

The face of the Queen brightened.  "The very thing," she said, "if only
the noisy little weeds will agree.  Go to them and say they can wear
yellow of the very shade they most desire half the season if they are
willing to accept our fluffy white caps for the other half."

The Fairies hurried to the dandelions and told them what the Queen had
said.  The dandelions stopped crying and said they would be satisfied,
and the Queen rode through the meadows, fields, gardens, and lanes,
dropping gold upon each weed as she passed along.

In the morning when the sun beheld his own bright color looking up at
him he was so surprised that he almost stood still.

The Fairies kept their promise, and when it was time to take off their
fluffy white caps they went among the dandelions and hung a cap on each
stem.

The dandelions did not cry again, and the grass sleeps on from sunset to
sunrise, undisturbed.




[Illustration: headpiece to Mr. ’Possum]


                             *MR. ’POSSUM*


Mr. ’Possum lived in a tree in the woods where Mr. Bear lived, and one
morning just before spring Mr. ’Possum awoke very hungry.

He ran around to Mr. Squirrel’s house and tried to get an invitation to
breakfast, but Mr. Squirrel had only enough for himself.  He knew that
Mr. ’Possum always lived on his neighbors when he could, so he said: "Of
course you have been to breakfast long ago, Mr. ’Possum, you are such a
smart fellow, so I will not offer you any."

Mr. ’Possum of course said he had, and that he only dropped in to make a
call; he was on his way to Mr. Rabbit’s house.

But he met with no better success at Mr. Rabbit’s, for he only put his
nose out of the door, and when he saw who was there, said: "I am as busy
as I can be getting ready for my spring planting.  Will you come in and
help sort seeds?"

Mr. Rabbit knew the easiest way to be rid of Mr. ’Possum was to ask him
to work.

"I would gladly help you," replied Mr. ’Possum, "but I am in a great
hurry this morning.  I have some important business with Mr. Bear and I
only stopped to say how-do-you-do."

"Mr. Bear, I am afraid, will not be receiving to-day," said Mr. Rabbit.
"It is rather early for him to be up, isn’t it?"

"I thought as the sun was nice and warm he might venture out, and I
thought it would please him to have me there to welcome him," said Mr.
’Possum. "Besides that, I wish to see him on business."

Now, Mr. ’Possum knew well enough that Mr. Bear would not be up, and he
wanted to find him sleeping, and soundly, too.

He went to the door and knocked softly, then he waited, and as he did
not hear any moving inside he went to a window and looked in.  There was
Mr. Bear’s chair and pipe just as he left them when he went to bed.  He
looked in the bedroom window and he could see in the bed a big heap of
bedclothes, and just the tiniest tip of Mr. Bear’s nose.

Mr. ’Possum listened, and he trembled a little, for he could hear Mr.
Bear breathing very loud, and it sounded anything but pleasant.

"Oh, he is sound asleep for another week!" said Mr. ’Possum.  "What is
the use of being afraid?"  He walked around the house until he came to
the pantry window; then he stopped and raised the sash.

He put in one foot and sat on the sill and listened. All was still, so
he slid off to the floor.  Mr. ’Possum looked around Mr. Bear’s
well-filled pantry.  He did not know where to begin, he was so hungry.

He became so interested and was so greedy that he forgot all about that
he was in Mr. Bear’s pantry, and he stayed on and on and ate and ate.

Then he fell asleep, and the first thing he knew a pair of shining eyes
were looking in the window and a big head with a red mouth full of long
white teeth was poked into the pantry.

Mr. ’Possum thought his time had come, so he just closed his eyes and
pretended he was dead, but he peeked a little so as to see what
happened.

The big head was followed by a body, and when it was on the sill Mr.
’Possum saw it was Mr. Fox, and the next thing he knew Mr. Fox came off
the sill with a bang and hit a pan of beans and then knocked over a jar
of preserves.

The noise was enough to awaken all the bears for miles around, and Mr.
’Possum was frightened nearly to death, for he heard Mr. Bear growling
in the next room.

While Mr. Fox was on the floor and trying to get up on his feet Mr.
’Possum jumped up and was out of the window like a flash.  Mr. Fox saw
something, but he did not know what, and before he could make his escape
the door of the pantry opened and there stood Mr. Bear with a candle in
his hand, looking in.

"Oh, oh!" he growled, "so you are trying to rob me while I’m taking my
sleep," and he sprang at Mr. Fox.

"Wait, wait," said Mr. Fox.  "Let me explain, my dear Mr. Bear.  You are
mistaken; I was trying to protect your home.  I saw your window open and
knew you were asleep, and when I got in the window the thief attacked me
and nearly killed me and now you are blaming me for it.  You are most
ungrateful. I shall know another time what to do."

Mr. Bear looked at him.  His mouth did not show any signs of food, and
Mr. Fox opened his mouth and told him to look.

"I wonder who it could have been?" he said, when he was satisfied that
Mr. Fox was not the thief.  "It may have been that ’Possum fellow.  I’ll
go over to his house in the morning."

The next morning Mr. Bear called on Mr. ’Possum. He found him sleeping
soundly, and when he at last opened the door he was rubbing his eyes as
though he was not half awake.

"Why, how do you do?" he said, when he saw Mr. Bear.  "I did not suppose
you were up yet."

"You didn’t?" asked Mr. Bear, and then he stared at Mr. ’Possum’s coat.
"What is the matter with your coat?" he asked.  "You have white hairs
sticking out all over you, and the rest of your coat is almost white,
too."

Now Mr. ’Possum had a black coat before, and he ran to the mirror and
looked at himself.  It was true; he was almost white.  He knew what had
happened. He was so frightened when he was caught in Mr. Bear’s pantry
by Mr. Fox, and heard Mr. Bear growl, that he had turned nearly white
with fright.

"I have been terribly ill," he told Mr. Bear, going back to the door.
"And I have been here all alone this winter.  It was a terrible
sickness; I guess that is what has caused it."

Mr. Bear went away, shaking his head.  "That fellow is crafty," he said.
"I feel sure he was the thief, and yet he certainly does look sick."

After that all the opossums were of dull white color, with long, white
hairs scattered here and there over their fur.  They were never able to
outgrow the mark the thieving Mr. ’Possum left upon his race.




[Illustration: headpiece to The Rooster that Crowed too Soon]


                   *THE ROOSTER THAT CROWED TOO SOON*


Red Rooster felt it was time he showed the new drake that had come to
live in the barnyard that he was a very brave rooster, as well as the
ruler of the barnyard.

So the next time he saw the drake he said: "I suppose you have been in
many battles, and no doubt the home you have just come from will miss
your protection as well as your company.’

"No," replied the drake; "I never was in a battle. I do not quarrel with
any one.  I believe in living in peace with all around me."

"Oh, well, that is all very well for you, perhaps," said the rooster;
"but for me, it is a different matter. I have to protect all the hens
and chickens and I also protect myself.  I can whip any rooster around
here, and no one dares come into my yard."

The drake did not reply, for just then a strange rooster came into the
yard, and Red Rooster ran at him with sweeping wings.

He pecked at the intruder and spurred him until he was glad to run away.

"There, what did I tell you?" said Red Rooster, coming back to the
drake.  "I am the greatest fighter around this part of the country.  I
am not afraid of anything."

"Oh, don’t talk so much about it," said the dog from his house near-by.
"I think there are a few things even you are afraid of, Mr. Rooster.  I
guess you would run from a fox."

"I am not afraid of a fox," said Red Rooster.  "I can scare him by
crowing loudly.  Master knows when I make a great noise it is time for
him to find the cause. Oh, I am very brave and can take care of myself."

Red Rooster felt so brave that he thought the highest place he could get
on the wall would be a good place to talk about his bravery, so he flew
up on the wall by the gate, and then to the top of the hen-house.

Madam Pig was in her pen on the other side. "Madam Pig," he said, "did
you see me whip that impudent rooster that came through our yard?"

Madam Pig grunted that she did not, as she could not see over the wall.

"You surely missed a great sight," said the rooster, stretching his neck
and strutting along the roof. "I am a brave fellow.  I never allow any
one to come around here that does not belong here.  I have just been
telling the new drake about my prowess and bravery.

"Mr. Drake," he called, as the new drake and his family waddled past the
hen-house, "if you need protection at any time do not hesitate to call
upon me."

A robin perched upon the roof not far from him, and Red Rooster flew at
him.  "Go away," he said. "I am very fierce and brave, and if you were
as large as a cow I should attack you just the same.  I am not afraid of
anything."

Red Rooster strutted up and down, crowing and thinking how brave he was,
and so intent was he upon his greatness that he did not heed the warning
cries that came from the fowls in the yard below him.

In a moment more a big hawk swooped down and held Red Rooster in his
claws.  He started to fly just as the shot from a gun sounded, and Red
Rooster fell to the ground.

He jumped up and shook himself, and looked in time to see his master
pick up the dead hawk.

"I guess that hawk won’t show himself around here again," he said.
"That was a very hard fight, but I won, even if I did get a tumble."

"Well, if you are not a conceited fellow!" laughed the dog; "but I was
not the only one that saw the hawk start off with you, and we all know
that if master had not shot it you would not be here to crow to-morrow
morning."

"No," piped the robin from a tree; "you were telling me how brave you
were, and the hawk was not half as large as a cow.  You were not very
brave when he came upon you.  You did not do a thing.  Oh, dear! it was
so funny to hear you crowing about your bravery and then to see you
caught up so soon by a hawk that is only a little larger than you."

The drake and all his family were listening, and Madam Pig had put her
head over the wall to listen. Poor Red Rooster felt that it was no time
to crow about his bravery, so he walked away with all the dignity he
could muster.

"He crowed too soon," said the drake.

"He crowed too much," said the dog.

"He crowed too loud," said the robin, "or he would have heard the
warning cries from the hens and chickens."




[Illustration: headpiece to Tearful]


                               *TEARFUL*


Once upon a time there was a little girl named Tearful, because she
cried so often.

If she could not have her own way, she cried; if she could not have
everything for which she wished, she cried.

Her mother told her one day that she would melt away in tears if she
cried so often.  "You are like the boy who cried for the moon," she told
her, "and if it had been given to him it would not have made him happy,
for what possible use could the moon be to any one out of its proper
place?  And that is the way with you; half the things for which you cry
would be of no use to you if you got them."

Tearful did not take warning or heed her mother’s words of wisdom, and
kept on crying just the same.

One morning she was crying as she walked along to school, because she
wanted to stay at home, when she noticed a frog hopping along beside
her.

"Why are you following me?" she asked, looking at him through her tears.

"Because you will soon form a pond around you with your tears," replied
the frog, "and I have always wanted a pond all to myself."

"I shall not make any pond for you," said Tearful, "and I do not want
you following me, either."

The frog continued to hop along beside her, and Tearful stopped crying
and began to run, but the frog hopped faster, and she could not get away
from him, so she began to cry again.

"Go away, you horrid green frog!" she said.

At last she was so tired she sat on a stone by the roadside, crying all
the time.

"Now," replied the frog, "I shall soon have my pond."

Tearful cried harder than ever, then; she could not see, her tears fell
so fast, and by and by she heard a splashing sound.  She opened her eyes
and saw water all around her.

She was on a small island in the middle of the pond; the frog hopped out
of the pond, making a terrible grimace as he sat down beside her.

"I hope you are satisfied," said Tearful.  "You have your pond; why
don’t you stay in it?"

"Alas!" replied the frog, "I have wished for something which I cannot
use now that I have it.  Your tears are salt and my pond which I have
all by myself is so salt that I cannot enjoy it.  If only your tears had
been fresh I should have been a most fortunate fellow."

"You needn’t stay if you do not like it," said Tearful, "and you needn’t
find fault with my tears, either," she said, beginning to cry again.

"Stop! stop!" cried the frog, hopping about excitedly; "you will have a
flood if you keep on crying."

Tearful saw the water rising around her, so she stopped a minute.  "What
shall I do?" she asked. "I cannot swim, and I will die if I have to stay
here," and then she began to cry again.

The frog hopped up and down in front of her, waving his front legs and
telling her to hush.  "If you would only stop crying," he said, "I might
be able to help you, but I cannot do a thing if you cover me with your
salt tears."

Tearful listened, and promised she would not cry if he would get her
away from the island.

"There is only one way that I know of," said the frog; "you must smile;
that will dry the pond and we can escape."

"But I do not feel like smiling," said Tearful, and her eyes filled with
tears again.

"Look out!" said the frog; "you will surely be drowned in your own tears
if you cry again."

Tearful began to laugh.  "That would be queer, wouldn’t it, to be
drowned in my own tears?" she said.

"That is right, keep on smiling," said the frog; "the pond is smaller
already."  And he stood up on his hind legs and began to dance for joy.

Tearful laughed again.  "Oh, you are so funny!" she said.  "I wish I had
your picture.  I never saw a frog dance before."

"You have a slate under your arm," said the frog. "Why don’t you draw a
picture of me?"  The frog picked up a stick and stuck it in the ground,
and then he leaned on it with one arm, or front leg, and, crossing his
feet, he stood very still.

Tearful drew him in that position, and then he kicked up his legs as if
he were dancing, and she tried to draw him that way, but it was not a
very good likeness.

"Do you like that?" she asked the frog when she held the slate for him
to see.  He looked so surprised that Tearful laughed again.  "You did
not think you were handsome, did you?" she asked.

"I had never thought I looked as bad as those pictures," replied the
frog.  "Let me try drawing your picture," he said.

"Now look pleasant," he said, as he seated himself in front of Tearful,
"and do smile."

Tearful did as he requested, and in a few minutes he handed her the
slate.  "Where is my nose?" asked Tearful, laughing.

"Oh, I forgot the nose!" said the frog.  "But don’t you think your eyes
are nice and large, and your mouth, too?"

"They are certainly big in this picture," said Tearful.  "I hope I do
not look just like that."

"I do not think either of us are artists," replied the frog.

Tearful looked around her.  "Why, where is the pond?" she asked.  "It is
gone."

"I thought it would dry up if you would only smile," said the frog; "and
I think both of us have learned a lesson.  I shall never again wish for
a pond of my own.  I should be lonely without my companions, and then,
it might be salt, just as this one was.  And you surely will never cry
over little things again, for you see what might happen to you, and then
you look so much prettier smiling."

"Perhaps I do," said Tearful, "but your pictures of me make me doubt it.
However, I feel much happier smiling, and I do not want to be on an
island again, even with such a pleasant companion as you were."

"Look out for the tears, then," said the frog as he hopped away.




[Illustration: headpiece to Hilda’s Mermaid]


                           *HILDA’S MERMAID*


Little Hilda’s father was a sailor and went away on long voyages.  Hilda
lived in a little cottage on the shore and used to spin and knit while
her father was away, for her mother was dead and she had to be the
housekeeper.  Some days she would go out in her boat and fish, for Hilda
was fond of the water.  She was born and had always lived on the shore.
When the water was very calm Hilda would look down into the blue depths
and try to see a mermaid.  She was very anxious to see one, she had
heard her father tell such wonderful stories about them--how they sang,
and combed their beautiful long hair.

One night when the wind was blowing and the rain was beating hard upon
her window Hilda could hear the horn warning the sailors off the rocks.
Hilda lighted her father’s big lantern and ran down to the shore and
hung it on the mast of a wreck which lay there, so the sailors would not
run their ships upon it.  Little Hilda was not afraid, for she had seen
many such storms.  When she returned to her cottage she found the door
was unlatched, but thought the wind had blown it open.  When she entered
she found a little girl with beautiful hair sitting on the floor. She
was a little frightened at first, for the girl wore a green dress and it
was wound around her body in the strangest manner.

"I saw your light," said the child, "and came in. The wind blew me far
up on shore.  I should not have come up on a night like this, but a big
wave looked so tempting I thought I would jump on it and have a nice
ride, but it was nearer the shore than I thought it, and it landed me
right near your door."

"Oh, my!"  How Hilda’s heart beat, for she knew this child must be a
mermaid.  Then she saw what she had thought a green dress was really her
body and tail curled up on the floor, and it was beautiful as the lamp
fell upon it and made it glisten.

"Will you have some of my supper?" asked Hilda, for she wanted to be
hospitable, although she had not the least idea what mermaids ate.

"Thank you," answered the mermaid.  "I am not very hungry, but if you
could give me a seaweed sandwich I should like it."

Poor Hilda did not know what to do, but she went to the closet and
brought out some bread, which she spread with nice fresh butter, and
filled a glass with milk.  She told her she was sorry, but she did not
have any seaweed sandwiches, but she hoped she would like what she had
prepared.  The little mermaid ate it and Hilda was pleased.

"Do you live here all the time?" she asked Hilda. "I should think you
would be very warm and want to be in the water part of the time."

Hilda told her she could not live in the water as she did, because her
body was not like hers.

"Oh, I am so sorry!" replied the mermaid.  "I hoped you would visit me
some time; we have such good times, my sisters and I, under the sea."

"Tell me about your home," said Hilda.

"Come and sit beside me and I will," she replied.

Hilda sat upon the floor by her side.  The mermaid felt of Hilda’s
clothes and thought it must be a bother to have so many clothes.

"How can you swim?" she asked.

Hilda told her she put on a bathing-suit, but the mermaid thought that a
nuisance.

"I will tell you about our house first," she began. "Our father,
Neptune, lives in a beautiful castle at the bottom of the sea.  It is
built of mother-of-pearl. All around the castle grow beautiful green
things, and it has fine white sand around it also.  All my sisters live
there, and we are always glad to get home after we have been at the top
of the ocean, it is so nice and cool in our home.  The wind never blows
there and the rain does not reach us."

"You do not mind being wet by the rain, do you?" asked Hilda.

"Oh no!" said the mermaid, "but the rain hurts us.  It falls in little
sharp points and feels like pebbles."

"How do you know how pebbles feel?" Hilda asked.

"Oh, sometimes the nereids come and bother us; they throw pebbles and
stir up the water so we cannot see."

"Who are the nereids?" asked Hilda.

"They are the sea-nymphs; but we make the dogfish drive them away.  We
are sirens, and they are very jealous of us because we are more
beautiful than they," said the mermaid.

Hilda thought she was rather conceited, but the little mermaid seemed to
be quite unconscious she had conveyed that impression.

"How do you find your way home after you have been at the top of the
ocean?" asked Hilda.

"Oh, when Father Neptune counts us and finds any missing he sends a
whale to spout; sometimes he sends more than one, and we know where to
dive when we see that."

"What do you eat besides seaweed sandwiches?" asked Hilda.

"Fish eggs, and very little fish," answered the mermaid.  "When we have
a party we have cake."

Hilda opened her eyes.  "Where do you get cake?" she asked.

"We make it.  We grind coral into flour and mix it with fish eggs; then
we put it in a shell and send a mermaid to the top of the ocean with it
and she holds it in the sun until it bakes.  We go to the Gulf Stream
and gather grapes and we have sea-foam and lemonade to drink."

"Lemonade?" said Hilda.  "Where do you get your lemons?"

"Why, the sea-lemon!" replied the mermaid; "that is a small mussel-fish
the color of a lemon."

"What do you do at your parties--you cannot dance?" said Hilda.

"We swim to the music, circle around and dive and glide."

"But the music--where do you get musicians?" Hilda continued.

"We have plenty of music," replied the mermaid. "The sea-elephant
trumpets for us; then there is the pipefish, the swordfish runs the
scales of the sea-adder with his sword, the sea-shells blob, and
altogether we have splendid music.  But it is late, and we must not talk
any more."

So the little mermaid curled herself up and soon they were asleep.

The sun shining in the window awakened Hilda next morning and she looked
about her.  The mermaid was not there, but Hilda was sure it had not
been a dream, for she found pieces of seaweed on the floor, and every
time she goes out in her boat she looks for her friend, and when the
whales spout she knows they are telling the mermaids to come home.




[Illustration: headpiece to The Mirror’s Dream]


                          *THE MIRROR’S DREAM*


"The very idea of putting me in the attic!" said the little
old-fashioned table, as it spread out both leaves in a gesture of
despair.  "I have stood in the parlor down-stairs for fifty years, and
now I am consigned to the rubbish-room," and it dropped its leaves at
its side with a sigh.

"I was there longer than that," said the sofa. "Many a courtship I have
helped along."

"What do you think of me?" asked an old mirror that stood on the floor,
leaning against the wall.  "To be brought to the attic after reflecting
generation after generation.  All the famous beauties have looked into
my face; it is a degradation from which I can never recover.  This young
mistress who has come here to live does not seem to understand the
dignity of our position.  Why, I was in the family when her husband’s
grandmother was a girl and she has doomed me to a dusty attic to dream
out the rest of my days."

The shadows deepened in the room and gradually the discarded mirror
ceased to complain.  It had fallen asleep, but later the moonlight
streamed in through the window and showed that its dreams were pleasant
ones, for it dreamed of the old and happy days.

The door opened softly and a young girl entered. Her hair was dark and
hung in curls over her white shoulders.  Her dark eyes wandered over the
room until she saw the old mirror.

She ran across the room and stood in front of it. She wore a hoop-skirt
over which hung her dress of pale gray, with tiny pink ruffles that
began at her slender waist and ended at the bottom of her wide skirt.

Tiny pink rosebuds were dotted over the waist and skirt, and she also
wore them in her dark curls, where one stray blossom bolder than the
others rested against her soft cheek.

She stood before the mirror and gazed at her reflection a minute; then
she curtsied, and said, with a laugh, "I think you will do; he must
speak to-night."

She seemed to fade away in the moonlight, and the door opened again and
a lady entered, and with her came five handsome children.

They went to the mirror, and one little girl with dark curls and pink
cheeks went close and touched it with her finger.  "Look," she said to
the others, "I look just like the picture of mother when she was a
girl."  And as they stood there a gentleman appeared beside them and put
his arm around the lady and the children gathered around them.  They
seemed to walk along the moonlight path and disappear through the
window.

Softly the door opened again and an old lady entered, leaning on the arm
of an old gentleman. They walked to the mirror and he put his arms
around her and kissed her withered cheek.

"You are always young and fair to me," he said, and her face smiled into
the depths of the old mirror.

The moonlight made a halo around their heads as they faded away.

The morning light streamed in through the window and the mirror’s dream
was ended.

By and by the door opened and a young girl came in the room.  Her dark
hair was piled high on her head, and her dark eyes looked over the room
until they fell upon a chest in the corner.  She went to it and opened
it and took out a pale-gray dress with pink ruffles.  She put it on;
then she let down her hair, which fell in curls over her shoulders.

She ran to the old mirror and looked at herself. "I do look like
grandmother," she said.  "I will wear this to the old folks’ party
to-night.  Grandfather proposed to grandmother the night she wore this
dress."  Her cheeks turned very pink as she said this, and she ran out
of the room.

Then one day the door opened again and a bride entered, leaning on the
arm of her young husband. There were tears in her eyes, although she was
smiling. She led him in front of the old mirror.  "This old mirror," she
said, "has seen all the brides in our family for generations, and I am
going far away and may never look into it again.  My brother’s wife does
not want it down-stairs, and I may be the last bride it will ever see,"
and she passed her hand over its frame caressingly.

And then she went away and the old mirror was left to its dreams for
many years.  Then one day the door opened again and a lady entered; with
her was a young girl.

The lady looked around the attic room until she saw the mirror.  "There
it is," she said.  "Come and look in it, dear."  The young girl followed
her. "The last time I looked into this dear old mirror," the lady said,
"was the day your father and I were married.  I never expected to have
it for my own then.  But your uncle’s wife wants to remodel the house,
and these things are in the way; she does not want old-fashioned things,
and they are willing I should have them."

"Oh, mother, they are beautiful!" said the girl, looking around the
room.  "We will never part with them; we will take them to our home and
make them forget they were ever discarded."

And so the mirror and the sofa and the table and many other pieces of
bygone days went to live where they were loved, and the old mirror still
reflects dark-haired girls and ladies, who smile into its depths and see
its beauty as well as their own.




[Illustration: headpiece to The Contest]


                             *THE CONTEST*


The old white rooster was dead.

The hens stood in groups of threes and fours all around the yard, the
turkeys were gathered around the big gobbler and seemed to be talking
very earnestly.

The ducks stood around the old drake, who was shaking his head
emphatically as he talked.

The geese were listening very attentively to the gander, and he was
stretching his neck and seemed to be trying to impress them with its
length.

"I see no reason now why I should not be king of the yard," he was
saying.  "White Rooster is dead and there is no other rooster to take
his place.  I am going to see the hens and ask them what they think.

"White Rooster is dead," he said to them, "and I think I should be king
of the yard.  My neck is very long and I can see over the heads of all
the fowls; I see no reason why I should not take the place of White
Rooster."

The turkeys and the geese, seeing the gander approach the hens, ran as
fast as they could to hear what he was saying.

The turkey gobbler, hearing the last part of the gander’s remark, said:
"How can you say that you can see over all heads?  Have you forgotten me
and my height?  And as for being king," he said, "the rooster never
should have been cock of the walk.  I am a much more majestic-looking
bird than any rooster. No, indeed, you should never think of ruling, Sir
Gander.  I should be king of the yard."

The gobbler walked away, spreading out his wings and letting them drag
on the ground and gobbling very loudly.

The ducks and the drake stood listening to all this talk, and as the
gobbler walked away the drake said: "I cannot understand why any one
should think of being king when I know so much of the world.  I am the
one to rule, for I have been all around the pond, and it is very large;
because of my knowledge I think I should be king."

"He must not be king," whispered one old hen to another; "he would make
us go in the water, and we will all be drowned."

They had talked a long time without reaching any decision, when the dog
happened along.  "What is the matter?" he asked.

"The old white rooster is dead," said the gobbler, who had returned with
his family to hear the discussion, "and I think I should be king, and
the drake and the gander think they should, but, of course, you can see
that I am best suited to rule the yard."

"You can settle that very easily," said the dog. "You can all take a
turn at being king, and in that way you will know who is best suited to
rule."  And so it was decided, and the gobbler was the first one to go
on trial.  The poor hens tagged along after the turkeys, for the gobbler
insisted upon parading all around the yard.  The gander and the drake
would not follow behind, so the gander and his family walked on one side
of the gobbler, and the drake and his family on the other.

The poor hens wept as they followed behind.  "I never was so humiliated
in my life," said one old hen, "and it is not right."

The next day there was so much dissatisfaction because of the gobbler’s
overbearing way that the dog decided that the drake must take his turn.

"Everybody must learn to swim," said the drake as soon as he was
appointed ruler.  "Come down to the pond," and off he started, his
family waddling after him.

"What did I tell you?" said the old hen.  "This will be the end of us."

The geese did not mind being in the water part of the time, but the
turkeys set up such a gobble and the hens cackled so loudly that the dog
had to decide right there that the drake was not a suitable king.

The gander, knowing that his time had come, stretched his neck and
looked very important.

"You need not go near the pond," he said to the hens, "but you must
learn to fly," and he spread out his wings as he spoke and flew over the
fence, the geese following him.

The turkeys flew to the top of the fence and roosted there, but the hens
and ducks stood on the ground, looking up at them in the most
discouraged way, and at the gobbler, who gobbled at them, saying, "You
are to be pitied, for you do not see all the sights we do and you never
can fly to the top of this fence.

"There is the master," he said.  "He is coming down the road and he has
something under his arm. I’ll tell you what it is when he gets nearer."

The hens were trying to look under the fence and through the holes.

The gobbler looked for a minute, and then he said: "I do believe--" then
he stopped.  "Yes, it is," he continued, looking again; "it’s a
rooster."

The gobbler flew down and the turkeys followed and the master drove the
gander and his family back to the yard.  "You will get your wings
clipped to-morrow," he said, and then from under his arm he released a
big yellow-and-black rooster, which flew to the ground, looked about,
spread his wings and crowed in a way that plainly said: "I am cock of
this walk and king of this yard.  Let none dispute my rights."

The drake collected his family and started for the pond, and the gander
and geese followed along behind.

The turkey spread his wings and held his head high as he strutted away
with his family.  But he did not impress the new rooster; he was ruler
and he knew it.

"Now the sun will know when to rise," said one hen, "and we shall know
when to awake."

"Yes," said another, "and we have had a narrow escape; it looked for a
while as if our family were to lose its social standing, but now that we
have a new king we can hold up our heads again and look down on the
others, if we have to go to the top of the wood-pile to do it."

The dog laughed to himself as he walked away. "I knew all the time," he
said, "that the new rooster was coming, but I thought it would do them
good to know they were only fitted to care for their own flock."




[Illustration: headpiece to The Pink and Blue Eggs]


                        *THE PINK AND BLUE EGGS*


"I tell you I saw them with my own eyes," said old White Hen, standing
on one foot with her neck outstretched and her bill wide open.  "One was
pink and the other was blue.  They were just like any other egg as far
as size, but the color--think of it--pink and blue eggs.  Whoever could
have laid them?"  Old White Hen looked from one to the other of the
group of hens and chickens as they stood around her.

"Well, I know that I didn’t," said Speckled Hen.

"You needn’t look at me," said Brown Hen.  "I lay large white eggs, and
you know it, every one of you.  They are the best eggs in the yard, if I
do say it."

"Oh, I would not say that," said White Hen. "You seem to forget that the
largest egg ever seen in this yard was laid by me, and it was a little
on the brown color; white eggs are all well enough, but give me a brown
tone for quality."

"You never laid such a large egg as that but once," replied Brown Hen,
"and everybody thought it was a freak egg, so the least said about it
the better, it seems to me."

"It is plain to understand how you feel about that egg," said White Hen,
"but it does not help us to find out who laid the blue and pink eggs."

"Where did you see them?" asked Speckled Hen.

"On the table, by the window of the farm-house," said old White Hen.  "I
flew up on a barrel that stood under the window, and then I stretched my
neck and looked in the window, and there on the table, in a little
basket, I saw those strange-looking eggs."

"Perhaps the master had bought them for some one of us to sit on and
hatch out," said Brown Hen.

"Well, I, for one, refuse to do it," said White Hen. "I think it would
be an insult to put those gaudy things into our nests."

"I am sure I will not hatch them," said Speckled Hen.  "I would look
funny hiking around here with a blue chick and a pink chick beside me,
and I a speckled hen.  No!  I will not mother fancy-colored chicks; the
master can find another hen to do that."

"You do not think for a minute that I would do such a thing, I hope,"
said Brown Hen.  "I only mentioned the fact that the master might have
such an idea, but as for mixing up colors, I guess not.  My little
yellow darlings shall not be disgraced by a blue and a pink chick
running with them."

"Perhaps White Hen is color-blind," said Speckled Hen.  "The eggs she
saw may be white, after all."

"If you doubt my word or my sight go and look for yourselves," said
White Hen, holding her head high.  "You will find a blue and a pink egg,
just as I told you."

Off ran Speckled Hen and Brown Hen, followed by many others, and all the
chicks in the yard.

One after another they flew to the top of the barrel and looked in the
window at the eggs White Hen had told them of.  It was all too true; the
eggs were blue and pink.

"Peep, peep, peep, peep, we want to see the blue and pink eggs, too,"
cried the chickens.  "We never saw any and we want to look at them."

"Oh dear! why did I talk before them?" said Brown Hen.  "They will not
be quiet unless they see, and how in the world shall I get them up to
that window?"

"Did it ever occur to you not to give them everything they cry for?"
said White Hen.  "Say ’No’ once in a while; it will save you a lot of
trouble."

"I cannot bear to deny the little darlings anything," said Brown Hen,
clucking her little brood and trying to quiet them.

"Well, you better begin now, for this is one of the things you will not
be able to do."  said White Hen, strutting over to the dog-house to tell
the story of the blue and pink eggs to Towser.

"Wouldn’t it be just too awful if the master puts those eggs in one of
our nests?" asked White Hen, when she had finished her story.

"Oh--oh!" laughed Towser, "that is a good joke on you; don’t know your
own eggs when you see them."

"Don’t tell me I laid those fancy-colored eggs," said White Hen, looking
around to see if any of her companions were within hearing distance.  "I
know I never did."

"But you did," said Towser, laughing again.  "I heard the master say to
my little mistress, ’If you want eggs to color for Easter take the ones
that White Hen laid; they are not so large as the others, and I cannot
sell them so well.’"

"Towser, if you will never mention what you have just told me I will
tell you where I saw a great big bone this morning," said White Hen.  "I
was saving it for myself.  I like to pick at one once in a while, but
you shall have it if you promise to keep secret what you just told me."

Towser promised, and White Hen showed where it was hidden.

A few days after Brown Hen said: "I wonder when master is going to bring
out those fancy eggs.  If he leaves them in the house much longer no one
will be able to hatch them."

"Oh!  I forgot to tell you that those eggs were not real eggs, after
all," said White Hen, "but only Easter eggs for the master’s little girl
to play with, so we had all our worry for nothing.  Towser told me, but
don’t say a word to him, for I did not let on that we were worried and
didn’t know they were only make-believe eggs; he thinks he is so wise,
you know, it would never do to let him know how we were fooled."




[Illustration: headpiece to Why the Morning-glory Sleeps]


                     *WHY THE MORNING-GLORY SLEEPS*


One day the flowers got into a very angry discussion over the sun, of
whom they were very fond.

"Surely you all must know that he loves me best," said the rose.  "He
shines upon me and makes me sweeter than any of you, and he gives me the
colors that are most admired by man."

"I do not see how you can say that," said the dahlia.  "You may give
forth more fragrance than I can, but you cannot think for a second that
you are more beautiful.  Why, my colors are richer than yours and last
much longer!  The sun certainly loves me the best."

The modest lily looked at the dahlia and said in a low, sweet voice, "I
do not wish to be bold, but I feel that the sun loves me and that I
should let you know that he gives to me more fragrance than to any of
you."

"Oh, oh!  Hear lily!" said the others in chorus. "She thinks the king of
day loves her best."

The lily hung her head and said no more, for the other flowers quite
frightened her with their taunts.

"How can any of you think you are the best beloved of the sun?" said
goldenglow.  "When you behold my glowing color which the sun bestows on
me, do any of you look so much like him as I do? No, indeed; he loves me
best."

The hollyhock looked down on the others with pitying glances.  "It is
plain to be seen that you have never noticed that the sun shines on me
with more warmth than on you, and now I must tell you he loves me best
and gives me the tenderest of his smiles.  See how tall I am and how
gorgeous are my colors.  He loves me best."

"When it comes to sweetness, I am sure you have forgotten me," said the
honeysuckle.  "Why, the king of day loves me best, you may be sure!  He
makes me give forth more sweetness than any of you."

"You may be very sweet," said the pansy, "but surely you know that my
pet name is heart’s-ease and that the sun loves me best.  To none of you
does he give such velvet beauty as to me.  I am nearest his heart and
his best beloved."

The morning-glory listened to all this with envy in her heart.  She did
not give forth sweetness, as many of the others, neither did she possess
the beauty of the rose or the pansy.

"If only I could get him to notice me," she thought. "I am dainty and
frail, and I am sure he would admire me if only he could behold me; but
the others are always here and in such glowing colors that poor little
me is overshadowed by their beauty."

All day morning-glory thought of the sun and wondered how she could
attract his attention to herself, and at night she smiled, for she had
thought of a plan. She would get up early in the morning and greet him
before the other flowers were awake.

She went to bed early that night so that she might not oversleep in the
morning, and when the first streak of dawn showed in the sky
morning-glory opened her eyes and shook out her delicate folds.  The dew
was on her and she turned her face toward the sun.

As soon as she peeped into the garden the sun beheld her.  "How dainty
and lovely you are!" he said.  "I have never noticed before the beauty
of your colors, morning-glory," and he let his warm glances fall and
linger upon her.

The sunflower all this time was watching with jealous eyes, for she was
the one who had always welcomed the sun, and this morning he seemed to
have entirely forgotten her.

Still sunflower kept her gaze upon them and wondered what she could do
to win back her king from the delicate little morning-glory.

But as she looked she saw the morning-glory sway and nod her head.  "She
is going to sleep," said the sunflower; "his warm breath makes her
drowsy, or else she was up so early that she cannot keep awake."

While the sunflower watched, sure enough the morning-glory nodded and
closed her eyes.  She was fast asleep, and the fickle sun, seeing that
she no longer looked upon him, looked away and beheld the sunflower
looking toward him with longing eyes.

"Good morning, King," she said, as she caught his eye, and she was wise
enough not to let him know she had seen him before.  So the sun smiled
and turned his face upon them all, and the sunflower kept to herself
what she had seen, knowing full well that she was the one who knew best
how to keep his first and last glances.

A little later one of the flowers called out: "Look at morning-glory;
she is still sleeping.  Let us tell her it is time to awaken."

"Morning-glory! morning-glory!" they called, but she did not answer.
She was sound asleep.

"That is strange," said the rose.  "I wonder if she has gone to sleep
never to awake.  I have heard of such things happening."

After two or three mornings the other flowers ceased to notice
morning-glory, for they thought she had ceased to be one of them, but
the wise sunflower kept her own counsel.  She knew that morning-glory
had to sleep all day in order that she might not miss the sun; but, as I
told you, she was wise enough not to complain, and she kept his love for
her by so doing.




[Illustration: headpiece to Dorothy and the Portrait]


                       *DOROTHY AND THE PORTRAIT*


Dorothy was very fond of her grandmother and grandfather, and liked to
visit them, but there were no little girls to play with, and sometimes
she was lonely for some one her own age.  She would wander about the
house looking for the queer things that grandmothers always have in
their homes.  The hall clock interested Dorothy very much.  It stood on
the landing at the top of the stairs, and she used to sit and listen to
its queer tick-tock and watch the hands, which moved with little nervous
jumps.  Then there were on its face the stars and the moon and the sun,
and they all were very wonderful to Dorothy. One day she went into the
big parlor, where there were pictures of her grandfather and
grandmother, and her great-grandfather and great-grandmother, also.

Dorothy thought the "greats" looked very sedate, and she felt sure they
must have been very old to have been the parents of her grandfather.
But the picture that interested her the most was a large painting of
three children, one a little girl about her own age, and one other
older, and a boy, who wore queer-looking trousers, cut off below the
knee.  His suit was of black velvet, and he wore white stockings and
black shoes.  The little girls were dressed in white, and their dresses
had short sleeves and low necks.  The older girl had black hair, but the
one that Dorothy thought was her age had long, golden curls like hers,
only the girl in the picture wore her hair parted, and the curls hung
all about her face.

Dorothy climbed into a big chair and sat looking at them.  "I wish they
could play with me," she thought, and she smiled at the little
golden-haired girl.  And then, wonderful to tell, the girl in the
picture smiled at Dorothy.

"Oh! are you alive?" asked Dorothy.

"Of course I am," the little girl replied.  "I will come down, if you
would like to have me, and visit with you."

"Oh, I should be so glad to have you!" Dorothy answered.

Then the boy stepped to the edge of the frame, and from there to the top
of a big chair which stood under the picture, and stood in the chair
seat.  He held out his hand to the little girls and helped them to the
floor in the most courtly manner.  Dorothy got out of her chair and
asked them to be seated, and the boy placed chairs for them beside her.

"What is your name?" asked the golden-haired girl, for she was the only
one who spoke.

"That was my name," she said, when Dorothy told her.  "I lived in this
house," she continued, "and we used to have such good times.  This is my
sister and my brother."  The little girl and boy smiled, but they let
their sister do all the talking. "We used to roast chestnuts in the
fireplace," she said, "and once we had a party in this room, and played
all sorts of games."

Dorothy could not imagine that quiet room filled with children.

"Do you remember how we frightened poor old Uncle Zack in this room?"
she said to her brother and sister, and then they all laughed.

"Do tell me about it," said Dorothy.

"These glass doors by the fireplace did not have curtains in our day,"
said the little girl, "and there were shells and other things from the
ocean in one cupboard, and in the other there were a sword and a helmet
and a pair of gauntlets.  My brother wrapped a sheet around him and put
on the helmet and the gauntlets, and, taking the sword in his hand, he
climbed into the cupboard and sat down.  We girls closed the doors and
hid behind the sofa.  Uncle Zack came in to fix the fire, and my brother
beckoned to him.  Poor Zack dropped the wood he was carrying and fell on
his knees, trembling with fright. The door was not fastened and my
brother pushed it open and pointed the sword at poor Uncle Zack.

"’Don’ hurt a po’ ol’ nigger,’ said Zack, very faintly.  ’I ’ain’ don’
noffin’, ’deed I ’ain’.’

"’You told about the jam the children ate,’ said my brother, in a deep
voice, ’and you know you drank the last drop of rum Mammy Sue had for
her rheumatism, and for this you must be punished,’ and he brought the
sword down on the floor of the cupboard with a bang.

"Poor Uncle Zack fell on his face with fright.  This was too much for my
sister and me, and we laughed out.

"You never saw any one change so quickly as Uncle Zack.  He jumped up
and we ran, but my brother had to get out of his disguise, and Uncle
Zack caught him.  He agreed not to tell our father if we did not tell
about his fright, and so we escaped being punished."

"Tell me more about your life in this old house," said Dorothy, when the
little girl finished her story. But just then the picture of Dorothy’s
great-grandmother moved and out she stepped from her frame. She walked
with a very stately air toward the children and put her hand on the
shoulder of the little girl who had been telling the story, and said:
"You better go back to your frame now."

"Oh dear!" said the little girl.  "I did so dislike being grown up, and
I had forgotten all about it, when my grown-up self reminds me.  That is
the trouble when you are in the room with your grown-up picture," she
told Dorothy.  "You see, I had to be so sedate after I married that I
never even dared to think of my girlhood, but you come in here again
some day and I will tell you more about the good times we had."

The boy mounted the chair first and helped his sisters back into the
frame.  Dorothy looked for her great-grandmother, but she, too, was back
in her frame, looking as sedate as ever.  The next day Dorothy asked her
grandmother who the children were in the big picture.

"This one," she said, pointing to the little golden-haired girl, "was
your great-grandmother; you were named for her; and the other little
girl and boy were your grandfather’s aunt and uncle.  They were your
great-great-aunt and uncle."

Dorothy did not quite understand the "great-great" part of it, but she
was glad to know that her stately-looking great-grandmother had once
been a little girl like her, and some day, when the great-grandmother’s
picture is not looking, she expects to hear more about the fun the
children had in the days long ago.




[Illustration: headpiece to Mistress Pussy’s Mistake]


                       *MISTRESS PUSSY’S MISTAKE*


A very kind gentleman, who lived in a big house which was in the midst
of a beautiful park, had a handsome cat of which he was very fond. While
he felt sure Pussy was fond of him, he knew very well she would hurt the
birds, so he put a pretty ribbon around Pussy’s neck, and on it a little
silver bell which tinkled whenever she moved and this warned the birds
that she was near.

Pussy resented this, but pretended she did not care.  One day a thrush
was singing very sweetly on the bough of a tree which overhung a small
lake. Pussy walked along under the tree, and, looking up at the thrush,
said: "Madam Thrush, you have a most beautiful voice, and you are a very
handsome bird.  I do wish I were nearer to you, for I am not so young as
I was once, and I cannot hear so well."

The thrush trilled a laugh at Pussy, and said: "Yes, Miss Puss, I can
well believe you wish me nearer, but not to see or hear me better, but
that you might grasp me."

Pussy pretended not to hear the last remark, but said: "My beautiful
Thrush, will you not come down where I can hear you better?  I cannot
get about as nimbly as I used to when I was young, or I would go to
you."

"I cannot sing so well on the ground," replied the thrush.  "You can
come up here, even if you are not so spry as you were.  But tell me, do
you not find the bell you wear very trying to your nerves?"

"Oh no," answered sly Pussy.  "It is so pretty that I’m glad to wear it,
and my master thinks I am so handsome that he likes to see me dressed
well. And then he can always find me when he hears the bell.  That is
why I wear it."

"I understand," answered the thrush, "and we birds are always glad to
hear it, too."  And she trilled another laugh at Pussy and added, "You
are certainly a very handsome creature, Miss Puss."

Pussy all this time had very slowly climbed the tree, for she wanted the
thrush to think she was old and slow, but the bird had her bright eyes
upon her. When Pussy reached the branch the thrush was on she stopped
and seated herself.

"Now, my pretty little friend, do sing to me your loudest song."

She hoped it would be loud enough to drown the tinkle of the bell.  The
thrush began and was soon singing very sweetly.  Pussy took a very
cautious step and then remained quiet.  The thrush stopped singing and
spread her wings.

"Oh, do not stop!" said Puss.  "Your song was so soothing I was in a
doze; do sing again."  And she moved a little closer.

The thrush took a step nearer to the end of the bough and said: "I am
glad you like my voice.  I will sing again if it pleases you so much."

She began her song, but she kept her eyes on Puss, and as Puss drew
nearer she moved closer to the end of the swinging bough.

She had reached a very high note when Puss gave a spring, but the thrush
was too quick; she flew out of Pussy’s reach, and splash went Pussy into
the lake, for she had not noticed that the thrush was moving to the end
of the bough, so intent was she on the thought of catching her.

Poor Pussy was very wet when she scrambled to the bank of the lake, and
the birds were chirping and making a great noise.

"How did you like your bath, Miss Puss?" the thrush called to her.  "You
should never lay traps for others, for often you fall into them
yourself."




[Illustration: headpiece to Kid]


                                 *KID*


Kid was one of those little boys who seemed to have grown up on the
streets of the big city where he lived.

He never remembered a mother or a father, and no one ever took care of
him.  His first remembrance was of an old woman who gave him a crust of
bread, and he slept in the corner of her room.  One day they carried her
away, and since then Kid had slept in a doorway or an alley.

By selling papers he managed to get enough to eat, and if he did not
have the money he stole to satisfy his hunger.

He was often cold and hungry, but he saw many other children that were
in the same condition, and he did not suppose that any one ever had
enough to eat or a warm place to sleep every night.

Kid went in to the Salvation Army meetings, when they held them in his
neighborhood, because it was a place where the wind did not blow, and
while there he heard them sing and talk about Some One who loved
everybody and would help you if only you would ask Him.  Kid was never
able to find out just where this Person lived, and, therefore, he could
not ask for help.

One day Kid saw a lady who was too well dressed to belong in his part of
the city, and he followed her, thinking that she might have a
pocket-book he could take.  The opportunity did not offer itself,
however, and before Kid realized it he was in a part of the city he had
never seen before.

The buildings were tall and the streets much cleaner than where he
lived.  Kid walked along, looking in windows of the stores, when he
noticed a lady standing beside him with a jeweled watch hanging from her
belt.

He had never seen anything so beautiful or so easy to take, and he
waited for a few more people to gather around the window, and then he
carefully reached for the watch, and with one pull off came the trinket,
and away ran Kid, like a deer, with the watch clasped firmly in his
begrimed little hand.

On and on he ran, not knowing where he was going--nor caring, for that
matter--and it seemed to Kid that the whole world was crying, "Stop,
thief!" and was chasing him.

After a while the noise grew fainter and fainter and he stopped and
looked back.  There was not a person in sight.

Kid looked around him.  All the houses were large with clean stone steps
in front of them.  Kid sat down on the bottom step of one of these
houses and looked at his treasure.

He held it to his ear and heard its soft tick, then he looked at the
sparkling stones on the case.  He opened it and watched the little hands
move, then he opened the back part, and there was the picture of a baby,
a little boy, Kid thought.  Around its chubby face were curls, and its
eyes were large and earnest-looking.  Kid sat gazing at it for some
minutes, wondering who it was.  When he looked up he saw a large
building across the street with a steeple on it, and on the top of that
a cross.

The door of the building was open, and after a while Kid walked across
the street and up the long, wide steps.  He went in and looked
cautiously about. It was still and no one was to be seen.

There were two doors, and Kid went to one of them and pushed it open.
He thought for a minute he was dreaming, for he did not suppose that
anything so grand could be real.

There were rows and rows of seats, and at the very end of the big room
Kid saw a light.  He walked down one of the aisles to where the little
flame was burning, and stood in front of the altar.

Kid looked at everything with a feeling of awe, but he had not the
slightest idea of what it all meant, and he wondered who lived in this
beautiful house, and thought it strange that no one appeared and told
him to go out.

There were pictures on the wall and Kid came to one of a sweet-faced
lady who was holding a little child.  Kid started and stepped back as he
looked at it.  "It is the baby in the watch," he said.  "This must be
where he lives and that is his mother."  Some one was coming.  He was
caught at last, he felt sure.  He slid into a pew and crawled under the
seat and kept very still--so still, in fact, that he fell asleep. When
he awoke a light was burning in the church and its rays fell across the
picture of the mother and child in such a way that the eyes of the
mother seemed to be looking straight at Kid under the seat.

For the first time in his life he felt like crying. "I wish I had a
mother," he thought, "and I should like to have her hold me in her arms
just as that little boy’s mother is holding him.  I would tell her about
this watch and perhaps she would tell me how to get it back to the
lady."

Kid crept from under the seat and stood up, and coming toward him down
the aisle was a man.  Kid thought he wore a queer-looking costume, and
he dodged back of the seat; but the man had seen him and there was no
use in trying to run away; besides that, Kid was not at all sure that he
wished to get away.

"Is this your house?" asked Kid, when the man came up to him.

"No, my son," he replied; "this is the house of God."

Kid’s heart leaped for joy; that was the name of the One the Salvation
Army people told him about, who loved everybody and helped you.

"If you please," said Kid, "I should like to see Him."

The good man looked at Kid very earnestly, and then he said, "If you
will tell me what you wish to see Him about, I am sure I can help you."

Kid told him about the watch and that he felt sure the lady lived there,
as the baby in the big picture was very much like the picture in the
watch.  "And if this is God’s house," said Kid, "I thought He might be
the father and forgive me.  I am very sorry that I took it."

The good man took Kid by the hand.  "Come with me," he said; "you are
forgiven, I am sure."

Kid was given a good supper, and for the first time in his life he slept
in a real bed.

The next day the good man found the owner of the watch, and when she
heard Kid’s story she forgave him.

Kid was placed in a school, where he learned to be a good boy, as well
as to be studious, and he soon forgot the old life.  He grew to be a man
of whom any mother could have been proud.  But the only mother Kid ever
knew was the mother of the little boy in the picture, which he cherishes
as a thing sacred in his life.




[Illustration: headpiece to The Shoemaker Rat]


                          *THE SHOEMAKER RAT*


One day a rat gnawed his way into a pantry, and after he had eaten all
he wanted he grew bold and went into the kitchen.

There the cook saw him and chased him with a broom, but, not being able
to hit him as he ran out of the door, she picked up a pair of shoes that
were standing near and threw them after him.

The rat picked them up and put them on.  On his way home he met a cat.
"What have you on your feet?" he asked the rat.

"Can you not see, my dear Tom?" said the rat. "They are shoes.  I am a
shoemaker, and, of course, must wear my own product."

"Make me a pair," said the cat, "and I will spare your life."

"Very well," replied the rat, "but first you must bring me some
leather."

So the cat ran away and brought back two hides.

When the rat saw the amount of leather he was struck with an idea.  "My
dear Tom," he said, "I can make you a suit of clothes and a pair of
gloves as well as the shoes, and you will be the envy of all the other
cats."

Tom was delighted and told the rat to hurry and make the outfit.

The wise rat first made the gloves and covered Tom’s sharp claws.  Then
he made the shoes for the hind feet, and when he had that done he felt
safe.

"Now you must wait," he said; "until I get something with which I can
fasten the coat."  He ran away and returned with some long, sharp
thorns.

Next the rat put the leather around Tom’s body and drew it tight,
fastening it with a thorn which he pushed so that the sharp point
pricked Tom.

"What are you doing?" asked Tom, angry at being hurt; but he could not
move, the leather costume was so stiff and tight, but he grabbed at the
rat with his mouth, and caught him by the tail.

The rat ran, leaving his tail in Tom’s mouth.

"I’ll know you," Tom called after him.  "When I am out of this suit I
will catch you and eat you."

The rat had not thought of that and he wondered what he should do, but
he was a wise old fellow, and when he reached home he called all his
brothers and sisters and cousins and aunts about him.

"I met a cat to-day," he said, "who had been to the city where all the
styles are new, and he told me that all the city rats are having their
tails cut off, so I had mine done.  If you want to be in style," he told
them, "you must have your tails like mine."

"Does it hurt?" asked one.

"Not a bit," answered the sly fellow, "and you have no idea how
comfortable it is running about without a tail to look after.  It is
very expensive to have it cut," he explained; "that is the only
difficult part.  I had to pay twenty pieces of cheese.  But I watched
while another fellow was having his cut, and I am sure I can do it as
well as the rat that did mine. And if you wish to be in style at a very
low rate I will take off your tails for five pieces of cheese each."

The rats all agreed, and ran away to get the cheese, and while they were
gone the wise rat ran for a chopping-knife.

Soon he had the tails cut and a goodly store of cheese.  "Now," he said
to himself, "Tom will never know me from the other rats."

He kept his eyes open for Tom, who had called his friends to help him
out of his suit and told them to watch for a rat without a tail.  But
when they saw all the tailless rats they gave up looking for one who had
put Tom into the suit of leather, and Tom, not liking to hunt any too
well, gave it up also.  "But the next time I meet a rat," said Tom, "I
will catch him, no matter whether he has a tail or not."




[Illustration: headpiece to The Poppies]


                             *THE POPPIES*


A long distance from here, in a far Eastern country, there once lived a
very rich king. All kings are not rich, you know, but this one was, and
his jewels were the most beautiful ever seen.

But this king dearly loved all the good things of this world and gave
feasts and dances that lasted for days without any one sleeping.  Of
course he could not lead such a life as that and have good health, and
at last there came a time when the king could not sleep.

At last he offered a reward to any one who could put him to sleep, no
matter how it was accomplished. He said to the one who could do this he
would give half his kingdom.

The poor king was the subject for many experiments, and when he had
almost given up hope of ever sleeping again there came a strange-looking
man to the gate of the castle.  He wore a turban and a long, flowing
robe of white, and wore around his neck many chains and strings of
queer-looking beads.

"I can make the king sleep," he said, "but I must be allowed to have the
grounds of the castle to myself and the king must obey me in every way."

The king was ready to do anything, and so the strange-looking man began
his work, but before he would do anything for the king he insisted upon
having half the kingdom given into his hands, and when this was done he
set to work.  No one was allowed to be near him, and the king was left
alone in the castle with him.

One morning, not long after, the king saw what looked to be a sea of
green all around the castle, but it really was a bed of green leaves,
and soon there appeared white flowers among the leaves, and then the
strange man told the king to walk among them.

Soon the king felt a drowsy feeling stealing over him, and he sat down
in the midst of the sea of green and in a few minutes he was sound
asleep.

Then the strange man began to repeat something in a sing-song tone and
wave his hands over the sleeping king.  He walked among the leaves and
flowers, repeating his queer rhyme, and the leaves and flowers grew
taller and taller until the king could not be seen, and the man moved
away, still chanting:

    "Poppy, poppy, flower of sleep,
    Your drowsy spell around him keep,
    For I can all his kingdom take
    If you do not let him wake."


The poppies grew until they reached the top of the castle, and every one
who went near to look for the king fell under the spell of their strange
power until the people around gave it up and the strange man became
king; he built a new castle and the old one was forgotten.

All went well with the new king until a young man called at his castle
and asked him about the old king, and the servants told him how the
strange flowers had grown around the castle and no one could go near,
and that every one thought that the old king was dead.

The new king, when he heard that the stranger was asking for the old
king, had him driven from the castle.

"Tell your master," said the stranger to the servants, "that he will
hear from me again."

The stranger went into the woods, where there lived an old witch, and at
midnight they came out and went to the castle among the strange flowers.

The witch held her hands high over her head and waved them up and down,
saying all the time:

    "Poppy, poppy, sleepy flower,
    Now I have you in my power.
    I would have you shorter grow
    Until the sleeping one you show."


Down came the tall flowers and bushes until the young man cried out,
"Here he is," and then the flowers ceased to grow small.  The witch
knelt beside the sleeping king and whispered in his ear:

    "Awake, good king, ’tis break of day,
    And drive the false king far away."


The king opened his eyes and looked at the witch and the young man
beside her.  "What has happened?" he asked.

"I will leave you to tell him," said the witch. "The sun is up and I
must go."

"When you offered to give half your kingdom to the one who could make
you sleep," said the young man, "I set out for your castle with a box
which contained a strange flower that had the power to make people
sleep, but it had to be used with the greatest care, and I alone knew
the secret of using it, for it was given to my grandmother by an old
witch doctor.

"Before I could reach you I was overtaken by a band of robbers and the
box stolen.  They made me tell what I intended doing with the flower, on
pain of death, but I did not tell the whole secret.  Then they put me in
a cave and rolled a stone in front of it too heavy for me to move, and
left.  I was almost dead from starvation when I was found by some
peasants, who nursed me until I was well enough to travel, when I
hurried here, only to find that one of the band of robbers had taken
your whole kingdom after putting you to sleep with the charmed flower.

"He drove me from the castle when he heard that I was asking for you,
and if it had not been for the witch who lives in the wood I should not
have been able to awaken you.  She knew the secret, as she is the
daughter of the witch who gave the flower to my grandmother."

When the king heard the strange story he hurried with the young man to
the castle where the robber king lived.  He was asleep when they
arrived, and the servants, who did not like their new master, ran out to
meet the old king, and when they heard what had happened they went back
to the castle and bound the robber while he slept, and when he awoke he
was so frightened that he promised to tell where the rest of his band
could be found if they would spare his life.

This they promised to do, and the country was rid of these bad men, for
they were put on a ship and made to work the rest of their lives.

The king was so grateful to the young man who rescued him that he made
him his heir, and when the king died he left him his kingdom.




[Illustration: headpiece to Little China Doll]


                          *LITTLE CHINA DOLL*


In a shop window sat a little China Doll.  She had been in the store so
long she could not remember ever living in any other place.

Long, long ago there were other china dolls, but one by one some little
girl had carried them away and she was left alone.  China Doll had black
painted hair and big, staring eyes, and her lips and cheeks were very
red.  Her body was filled with sawdust and her hands and arms to the
elbow were china, as were her feet and legs to her knees.

By and by wax dolls came to the store; they had real hair, all curls,
and eyes that would open and close, and poor China Doll was set back in
the window, and after a while she was put in a box on the shelf and
taken out only once a year--at Christmas-time--when she was dusted and
put in the window again.  She felt very lonely with so many stylish wax
dolls, and as she had given up hope of ever being chosen by any little
girl, she was glad when the little old lady who kept the store put her
back in the box on the shelf.

At last there came a time when the children no longer came to the store,
but went to the big city for their toys, and China Doll and the little
old store-keeper grew old together.

China Doll sat in the window all the time now, with tape and thread and
other useful things, but was the only thing little folk could want.

One day in summer a tally-ho stopped in front of the store, and a party
of young people came in. They bought a number of things and filled the
old store with their laughter.  Suddenly the prettiest girl reached into
the window and took out China Doll.  "Oh, you dear, quaint little doll!"
she said.  "My grandmother has one just like this, girls, and I have
asked her many times to give it to me to make a French pincushion, but
she will not let me have it."

Oh, how China Doll’s heart beat!  Could it be true that she was going at
last?  Yes, the pretty girl bought her and took her away on the
tally-ho.

The next day she dressed China Doll in the prettiest silk dress, such a
one as she had dreamed of years ago, with an overskirt and purled
sleeves.  Then she made her the dearest poke-bonnet trimmed with little
roses.  She also made her a pair of kid boots.

When China Doll was all dressed the pretty girl put a ribbon over her
arm, and on each end was a little bandbox.  Then she stood China Doll on
her dressing-table and used the little boxes for pincushions. And there
China Doll lived a very happy life, which teaches that all things come
to those who wait.




[Illustration: headpiece to The Disorderly Girl]


                         *THE DISORDERLY GIRL*


Louise was just going out of the door with her sled when her mother
called to her.  Louise hesitated, for she knew that her mother was
calling her to make her play-room tidy and she wanted to go coasting
with the other children.

She went back slowly and asked, "What is it, mother?"

"Your play-room must be put in order before you can go out to play," her
mother replied.  "You have had plenty of time this week to do it, but
you have neglected it, and now you cannot put it off another day."

"Why can’t Jane do it?" asked Louise.

"Jane will clean the room," her mother replied, "but it is your duty to
pick up the books and toys that are strewn around."

Louise pouted, but she knew that she must do as her mother said, and she
took off her hat and coat and went up to her play-room.  She went in and
closed the door.  It certainly was a very disorderly-looking room.
Books were on the floor and games were on the table, doll clothes were
strewn in all parts of the room.

Louise had picked up most of the things when she saw from the window her
little friend Clara passing the house.  "Clara!" she called, "wait for
me, I have to put my play-room in order before I can go coasting."  But
Clara would not wait.

Louise closed the window, threw herself on the couch, and began to cry,
saying she thought it was mean everybody was going coasting but her.

All at once she saw two little girls walking toward her.  They looked
just like her dolls--Bella and Emily--only they were as large as
herself.

Louise tried to get up, but she was unable to move.

"Let us undress her," said Bella Doll, coming over to Louise and lifting
her by one arm.

"Yes," said Emily Doll, "and comb her hair."

Then Louise knew what had happened--she had turned into a doll and the
dolls had become little girls.

The doll girls undressed Louise and put on her nightdress, pulling it
over her head in the most careless manner, Louise thought.  Then they
combed her hair, pulling it terribly.

"I wonder how she likes to have her hair pulled," said Bella Doll.

"She knows how it feels, now," said Emily.

"I think she better go out," said Bella Doll, "instead of going to bed,"
and they dressed her in a thin white dress.  "Now we will take her out
in the cold; that is the way she does with us."

They fastened her clothes with pins and pushed them right through her
body, and after she was dressed they changed their minds about taking
her out and threw her on the floor and began playing games.

"I wonder if they are going to leave me here," thought Louise.  "Some
one will be sure to step on me."  Just then she saw a Teddy Bear lying
on his side under the couch.  "Why are you under there?" Louise asked.

"The little girl who was playing with me dropped me back of the couch a
week ago," he said, "and I have been here ever since, and you will
probably remain on the floor where you are now, for she never picks up
her toys.  She is a very careless girl."

Louise did not reply, for just then Emily Doll came over to the couch
for a book and pushed Louise out of the way with her foot.  Bella Doll
set out a croquet set and one of the balls hit Louise on the head.  Then
Emily dropped her book and said: "Come along, Bella, let us go
outdoors."

Louise watched them as they went out.  "Oh, this is the way she always
leaves her room," said Teddy Bear, for he could not see from under the
couch there were two little girls, and thought it was Louise who went
out of the door.  "She never thinks of us," the Teddy Bear continued,
"or how uncomfortable we may be, for she is a very careless and untidy
girl."

The door opened and Bella Doll came in.  She went over to the couch for
her hat and Louise saw her foot over her head.  "She will break me if
she steps on me," cried poor Louise, and she jumped up as she cried
aloud.  There she was on the couch.  She had been asleep.  She got up
and finished her work, when suddenly she thought of the Teddy Bear, and
looked under the couch.  There he was on his side just as she had seen
him in her dream.  Louise picked him up and set him in a chair; then she
looked at Bella’s clothes to make sure there were no pins pricking her,
and after looking at Emily also she put both of them in a comfortable
place.  Her books were put on a shelf, and she resolved never again to
let her room get so untidy or to let her dolls or Teddy Bear suffer from
neglect.  "Perhaps they do feel things," she said.  "Anyway, I’ll be
sure not to hurt them or let them be in uncomfortable positions, for I
was very miserable lying on the floor thinking I might be stepped upon."




[Illustration: headpiece to The Wise Old Gander]


                         *THE WISE OLD GANDER*


Once there lived a farmer who was not a good caretaker.  He did not have
a house for the hens and chickens and geese and ducks, and Old Fox, who
lived in a hole over the hill, never had any trouble in getting a nice
goose or a fat hen for his supper or breakfast.

"Something must be done at once," said Madam Goose.  "There will be no
one left in the whole yard if this keeps on.  Why, only last night Madam
Gray Hen was carried off and she has left all those little chicks; it is
really too awful to think of."

"But what can we do?" asked Gray Goose.  "The rooster does not know, for
I heard one of his family ask him, and he only said the master should
take better care of us."

"So he should," replied Madam Goose, "but he doesn’t, so we must care
for ourselves unless we wish to be carried off, too.  Let us go to the
gander; he may be able to help us."

"Come with us," they called to the rooster and black hen who were
talking together; "we are going to see the gander and ask him to help us
to be rid of Old Fox over the hill."

The gander stretched out his neck and blinked his eyes as he listened to
their tale of woe.

"You are right, something must be done," he said; "and you are quite
right in coming to me also.  I will think over the matter and give you
my advice later."

"Later!" screamed Madam Goose.  "Later there will be no need for advice;
there will be no one to give it or to advise.  What we need is advice at
once, and something that will rid us of Old Fox under the hill.  He is
eating the whole yard, one by one."

"Well, well," answered the gander, standing on one foot and then on the
other.  "I will think over the matter for a short time and then tell you
my decision.  You know, my dear madam, that great minds must have quiet
to think out important matters.  Leave me, I beg of you all, for a
little while."

As soon as the gander was alone he waddled over to the pig-pen.  "Mr.
Pig," he said, "I am going to ask your advice.  Old Fox over the hill is
carrying off all the fowls and something must be done."

"Ugh, ugh," grunted the pig.  "I can tell you what will frighten him
away.  I will stay awake to-night and grunt at him; he will know better
than to linger where I am."

"Thank you, thank you, Mr. Pig," said the gander, backing away from the
pig-pen.  "I will tell my friends, and I am sure they will feel safe
to-night."

"Conceited fellow," said the gander.  "I guess it will take more than
his grunts to scare that foxy fellow."

Then he went to the donkey.  "He isn’t very wise," thought the gander,
"but sometimes those who have the least wisdom speak wisdom without
knowing it.

"Mr. Donkey, I have come to ask your advice. Old Fox is carrying off our
hens and geese.  Something must be done to stop him, or soon there will
be none left."

"Quite so; quite so.  I see; I see, Mr. Gander," said the donkey.  "You
have come to the right place for advice.  Now go back to your friends
and tell them to have no fear; I will take the matter in hand."

"But what are you going to do?" asked the gander.

"Why, my dear sir, I am going to bray at Old Fox when he comes.  I am
going to bray at him, and you will see he will not stay long when he
hears my commanding voice."

"Oh, how can I ever thank you?" said the gander, walking away.  "I will
tell my friends at once that you will take care of them to-night."

"Foolish old donkey," said the gander to himself. "I guess Old Fox has
heard a donkey bray before this.  I’ll try the cow next.

"Madam Cow, Old Fox is carrying off all the fowls, one by one, and if
something is not done at once to stop him, there will be none of us
left.  What would you advise?"

"Oh, don’t ask me, Mr. Gander," said the cow. "All I can do is to moo,
and Old Fox would no more mind that than the wind blowing.  I wish I
were wise enough to advise you, but I am not.  But if I can help you in
any way let me know."

"Thank you, Madam Cow," said the gander, waddling away.  "You may hear
from me.  We never can tell when we shall need the help of our friends."

The next one the gander visited was the cat.

"Can you help me, Madam Puss?" began the gander.  "We fowls are all in
trouble; Old Fox carries off one or more of our number every night, and
something must be done to stop it at once."

The cat opened her mouth very wide and yawned, and the gander wondered
if he had been wise, after all, in asking her for advice in this matter.

But Puss closed her mouth with a snap and sat up.

"Of course I can help you," she said.  "Did you ever see my claws?"

The gander backed away as Puss held them up to his view.

The gander confessed that he had not and Puss went on: "Well, leave it
to me to protect the barnyard; that dog Rover never seems to think about
anything but eating and sleeping.  I will yowl and spit at Old Fox when
he comes to-night, and I can tell you and your friends he will not come
again."

"Thank you, thank you, Madam Puss," said the gander, running away.

"My, but that was a narrow escape for me!" said the gander.  "She
positively looks awful when she opens her mouth.  I seem to be getting
advice, but not the kind that will save my friends; they all feel sure
they can scare Old Fox, but not one of them will be able to; I don’t
know that all of them together would--"

The gander stopped still and held up his head.  "I have it," he said, "I
have the very plan; I will get them all together and each shall do his
part.  I believe we can scare Old Fox away for good and all time."

The gander went to the dog and he promised to bark.  "Of course, there
is no need of having the others around if I do that," said the dog.
"But bring them along if you like; every little helps."

That night the donkey, the dog, the cat, the cow, and the pig were
gathered in the barnyard; each one protested that the others were not
needed, all but the cow; she was modest, and said she would help.  Then
the rooster came and offered to crow and the geese were to quack.

"Now you all must hide," said the gander, "and don’t move until Old Fox
gets right in the middle of the yard; then jump up and do your worst."

Old Fox waited until it was very late, and then crept over the hill and
up to the farm.  He listened, and, hearing no sound, he crept into the
barnyard. He was just about to reach a fat goose when all the animals
began.  The dog barked, the pig squealed, the donkey brayed, the cow
mooed, the geese quacked, the rooster crowed, and Puss, true to her
word, yowled and sprang at Old Fox, who was so frightened at the
terrible noise he forgot to run until Puss struck at him with her sharp
claws; then he took to his swiftest speed, and away he went over the
hill and far away, and was never again seen near that farm.

He told some of his friends that a most horrible animal lived there and
must have eaten all the hens and geese and was big enough to eat them,
for he saw at least twenty feet and claws and heads of all sizes.




[Illustration: headpiece to Dinah Cat and the Witch]


                       *DINAH CAT AND THE WITCH*


Once upon a time there was a little girl named Betty.  She was an
orphan, and a bad landlord turned her out of her home.  The only friend
she had was a black cat named Dinah.  Betty was crying as she walked
along the road, and Dinah Cat ran beside her, rubbing against her feet.
All at once she ran in front of Betty and stood on her hind legs.  "Do
not cry, mistress," she said. "I’ll take care of you."

Betty was so surprised to hear Dinah Cat speak that she stopped crying
at once.  "You poor Dinah Cat," she said, "what can you do?  We must go
to the city, and if I can find work we shall be able to live; if not,
you must take care of yourself, for you can catch mice and keep from
starving."

"You come with me, mistress," answered Dinah Cat, "and you will not need
to work and you will not starve."  And she put out her paw for Betty to
take and walked alongside her.  When they came to a path leading into
the wood Dinah Cat led Betty along this path until they were in front of
two very large trees which had grown together, but there was a big
opening in the trunk.  "We’ll go in here," said Dinah Cat, and as they
stepped through they were in a hall.  She led Betty up the stairs to a
room where there was a snowy-white bed and pretty furnishings. "Dinner
will be served as soon as you are dressed, mistress," said Dinah Cat.

After she had gone Betty looked around, and in the closets she found
pretty dresses which just fitted her.  She put on one of them, and in a
few minutes she was ready for dinner.  Just then she heard a soft,
scratching noise at the door, and when she opened it Dinah Cat walked
in.

"How do you like your new home, mistress?" she asked.

"Very much," Betty answered.  "But we cannot live in such a nice house.
We have no money, and, besides that, this house must belong to some one.
And this dress I have on must belong to some little girl.  I should not
wear it."

"The dress did belong to a little girl," said Dinah Cat, "but she cannot
wear it now, and she wants you to have it.  And do not fret about the
house.  It belongs to me.  I cannot tell you any more just now, but you
need not worry any more about anything, for you are to live here, if you
wish, after you have dinner, for then you will meet a boy, and you may
not like him."

Dinah Cat led Betty into a room where the table was set for three
persons, and when they were seated a boy about Betty’s age came in and
sat with them. He wore his hat, and a thick veil hung from it.

"I am sorry I cannot remove my hat," he said, in a very sweet voice,
"and I will go away if you’d rather I would."

"Oh no," said Betty, feeling very much like an intruder.  "I am very
grateful to you for letting me stay, and I will help to do the work."

"You do not need to work," said the boy.  "If you will stay we will be
very glad."

Betty did not once get a glimpse of his face, he lifted the veil so
carefully.  And there sat Dinah Cat, using her knife and fork like any
lady.  Betty smiled to herself when she thought of her eating from a
saucer.

Suddenly Dinah Cat slid out of her chair and crawled under it, and the
little boy trembled so that his chair shook.  Betty looked around to
find the cause of their strange behavior, and saw standing in the
doorway an old woman with a staff in her hand. She hobbled over to where
Dinah Cat sat and raised the staff.  Betty thought she was going to
strike her.

"Don’t you hurt Dinah Cat!" she cried, running toward the old witch, who
was so startled that she dropped the staff, and Betty picked it up.

"Don’t let her have it again," said the boy; "that is the cause of all
our trouble."

Betty threw the staff in a closet and locked the door. All this time the
witch was stepping backward toward the door by which she entered, and
she grew smaller with each step.  By the time she was out of the house
she looked like a black speck, and a breeze blowing just then carried
her out of sight.  "But how shall we ever be ourselves again?" said the
boy.  "She has gone, and here we are, in this state."

"Perhaps the stick will do it," said Dinah Cat.

Betty wondered what they meant, and the boy told her that Dinah Cat was
his sister before the witch changed her into a cat, and made his face so
hideous that he had to wear a veil, and they had lived very happily
together.  "But one day the old witch came and wanted to live with us,
and we let her for a while, but she was so cross and made us so unhappy
we told her she must go away.  Then she brought all this change upon us,
and every once in a while she returns and frightens us, for we do not
know what she will change us into next."

"Let me get the stick," said Betty.  "Perhaps we can change Dinah Cat to
your sister again."

Betty opened the door of the closet, and instead of the stick there was
a bright streak of light, and walking on it was a little Fairy who held
a wand in her hand.

"You will soon be happy again," she told them. "I have destroyed the
stick and the old witch will never return."

Then she walked over to Dinah Cat and touched her with her wand and
there stood a little girl about Betty’s age in place of the black cat.

"Now close your eyes," said the Fairy, "for I want the boy to remove his
veil, and his face is not pleasant to look upon."

Betty did as the Fairy told her, but I am sorry to tell you that she
peeked a very little.  Betty closed her eyes tight after the first
glimpse and waited for the Fairy to tell her to open them again, and
when she did there stood the boy with a very smiling face. His sister
ran to him and put her arms around him. "Now we shall be happy," she
said, "and Betty will live with us.  How can we thank you?" she asked
the Fairy.

"Oh, I shall be repaid by seeing you all happy," the Fairy replied.
"And now I must go."

"Will we see you again?" asked Betty.

"No," answered the Fairy.  "I only appear when people are in trouble,
and you will never need me again."




[Illustration: headpiece to The Star and the Lily]


                        *THE STAR AND THE LILY*


Once there bloomed in a garden a beautiful white lily, on a long stalk
so tall that she towered over all the flowers that bloomed near her.

Of course, the sunflowers at the back of the garden were much taller and
the hollyhocks that grew in front of the sunflowers were taller, too,
and also the sweet peas.  But they were not near the beautiful lily.
Beside her bloomed pansies and poppies, and many other beautiful
flowers, but they were not so tall as the lily.

A rose-bush growing near the lily noticed that she drooped and did not
look as happy as usual one morning, and she asked what had happened.

"Oh, I am thinking of some one I love," answered the lily, with a sigh.

"That should not bring a sigh or make you look sad, my fair friend,"
said the rose.  "Love should make you happier than anything else in the
world."

"Yes, I suppose it should," answered the lily, "but my love is so far
away I am not sure that I am loved in return."

"Oh, immodest lily!" said the rose.  "I thought you the most modest of
all of us, and here you are in love with some one you do not know.  Tell
me about it, do?" said the rose, alert with interest.

"I will tell you, dear rose," said the lily, "and perhaps you can tell
me how to win the love of my beloved, or how I can overcome my great
love for him."

"I will do anything I can for you, my dear," said the rose, "but do tell
me quick all about your love-story."

"One night," began the lily, "when everything was quiet in the garden
and all the other flowers were fast asleep, I happened to raise my head
and open my petals.  The moonlight was streaming over the garden, and I
looked around at all the sleeping flowers and wondered how I happened to
awake at that hour, when, looking up to see the moon in all her
splendor, I beheld a beautiful star looking down at me.

"At first I thought it was looking at the whole garden, but then I knew
all the others were asleep and I must be the one it was smiling at, for
it twinkled and brightened as I gazed at it.

"I lowered my head and slyly looked again, and still the star was
looking, and every time it saw me raise my head it would twinkle a smile
at me.  The next night I wanted to make sure it was I that the star
really smiled at, and when it was bedtime I only bowed my head and did
not sleep.

"Then when the garden was still and I was sure you all slept I again
raised my head and saw my star smiling straight down at me.

"This time I was sure I was the only one that the star could be smiling
at, and I raised my head and opened my petals and let all the perfume of
my heart go up to him, and I did not feel that I was bold, for we were
all alone and he smiled down upon me, his love for two nights.

"But now I am sorrowful, for it is day and I cannot see my beloved.  He
seems only to show his love for me at night.  What shall I do, dear
rose?  I am not strong enough to stay awake all day and all night too.
Soon I will die if I do, and yet I cannot live if I do not see my star
each night.  That is why I sigh and look so sad, for I might sleep all
night some time and my star will think I do not love him."

The rose shook her head.  "I cannot advise you, my friend," she said;
"you are in love with some one far above you, and are not even sure you
are loved in return.  Be wise and sleep through the night as the rest of
us do, and give up this uncertain lover."

But the lily only drooped her head and sighed, and that night looked for
her lover again, but the sky was dark and no bright smile greeted the
poor lily.  All night she gazed into the dark sky, and when the first
light of day came she was still looking for her lover.

The rose looked at her when the sun came upon them that morning, but the
lily did not raise her head; she was too full of sorrow to lift her face
to the sun, and by and by the rose saw that she was drooping lower and
lower, so she spoke to her.

"Lily," she said, leaning closer to her, "raise your head and let the
sun cheer you.  You will die if you do not open your petals and get the
light and air."

But the poor lily was past caring for sun or air; her petals were limp
and her stalk withered.

The rose leaned closer to her as she faintly answered, and this is what
she heard:

"Good-by, my friend; I shall bloom no more.  My bright star hid his face
from me last night and I have no desire to live longer.  Perhaps I may
see him after I am gone from here, and if that is true I shall be happy,
but I cannot live here and not see his face.’"

The wind blew through the garden just then and took the lily from her
stem, scattering her petals far out of the garden.

"Poor lily!" murmured the rose, "she went the way we all will go, but
her heart was broken and she died before her time.  If she had only
looked for love here in the garden instead of looking so far above her
she might be blooming now, poor lily."




[Illustration: headpiece to Lazy Gray]


                              *LAZY GRAY*


All the other squirrels called him Lazy Gray, which was really not a
very nice name for a squirrel to have, but it fitted this squirrel, and
I am going to tell you how he came to be called by such an unpleasant
name.

When Lazy Gray was born there were three little squirrels in his family,
but he was the youngest and his mother thought he was the prettiest, and
all the rest of the family used to wait on him a great deal, and his
mother did not ask him to do errands or to climb trees or any other of
the hard tasks that most squirrels have to do.  And Lazy Gray took
advantage of the kindness of his mother and his brothers and sister, and
used to ask them to wait on him.  When he was thirsty and wanted a drink
of water he would call to his mother and say, "I am thirsty"; and she
would take a nutshell and go down to the brook and fill it with nice
cool water and bring it to him for him to drink.  And sometimes he
wouldn’t even say "Thank you" when he had finished.

And he used to make his brothers go on long journeys through the woods
to get a particular kind of nut of which he was very fond; and if they
happened to bring him one that was not good he would find fault with
them and tell them that they did not know good nuts from bad ones.

All through the summer he fooled away his time sleeping and lying in the
sun and never a single nut did he gather for himself.  But when fall
came and his two brothers were taken ill, his mother said that he would
have to help her gather nuts because she could not gather enough to last
the whole family through all the long winter.  Lazy thought it was very
hard that he should be called upon to work for his brothers even if they
were sick, and he complained very bitterly about how hard it was for him
to climb trees all day and store nuts.  Whenever he could he stole away
and lay down behind a rock and kept hidden until his mother came and
found him.  And then she would tell how, when it got cold and there was
snow all over the ground and he was hungry, he would wish that he had
been a good squirrel and had gathered the nuts while he could.

But he did not believe her and said, "Oh, I have gathered all the nuts I
shall want and am not going to work any more," and then he would go to
sleep again.

Weeks passed by, and it grew colder and colder and the snow came, and
all the squirrels began to draw on their stores of nuts.  Lazy found
that he got pretty hungry sometimes and that the habit of eating and
drinking all he wanted in the summer made him want to eat and drink all
he wanted in the winter.  And as he had never taught himself
self-denial, he ate all he wanted, and very early in the winter he began
to see that the nuts he had gathered would not last him half-way through
the winter, and almost before he knew it his whole store was exhausted
and he had nothing to eat.

Then he asked his mother to let him have some of the nuts that she had
gathered, and being a kind mother, she let him have just as many as she
could, but she still had to keep some for his sick brothers. When she
would not give him all he thought he ought to have he decided that he
would go over to a neighboring tree and ask a squirrel over there for
some of his nuts, and for weeks he went from one tree to another begging
nuts, until every squirrel in the woods hated to see him coming, for
they knew he was going to beg food that he should have gathered for
himself.

At last he became so much of a nuisance that all the squirrels in the
wood held a meeting and decided that each one of them would give two
nuts to "Lazy," as they now all called him, and that he would have to
live for the rest of the winter on the store they contributed or else
starve.

When Lazy saw what a small store of nuts he would have to live upon
until spring he was frightened, for he had eaten almost as many nuts as
there were there in a week.

But he knew he had to make them last, so he ate very sparingly, and his
sides began to be less plump and his cheeks less full, and by springtime
he was a pretty sorry-looking squirrel, with his ribs showing plainly
through his sides and his bushy tail looking bigger than the whole of
the rest of him.

But it taught him a good lesson, and early in the next summer, just as
soon as there were any nuts to be had, he began to store them away, and
when winter came again he had a big hole in the tree filled full and his
mother was much pleased.

"You see," she told him, "how wicked it is not to provide for the future
and store up things that are necessary against the time when you will
need them."

And Lazy agreed with her and told her that never again so long as he
lived would he merit the name of "Lazy."




[Illustration: headpiece to The Old Gray Hen]


                           *THE OLD GRAY HEN*


"Oh, dear!" said the Old Gray Hen, "what a life this is!  Up in the
morning at the break of day in answer to the summons of that crowing
rooster; scratch all the forenoon for worms; sit on a nest and leave a
beautiful egg there, and in half an hour along comes somebody and takes
the egg and I never see it again.  Then every spring I am put on a lot
of eggs that I never saw before and am supposed to sit there until a
brood of chickens are hatched out, and then for weeks I have to scratch
for them as well as for myself.  I don’t see anything in this sort of
life, and I propose to change it until it is more to my liking and more
as the life of such a fine hen as I am ought to be."

Old Daddy Gander happened along just as the Gray Hen finished talking to
herself.  "What’s the trouble this morning?" he asked.  "Why all this
sputtering and spluttering?  One would think that the whole barnyard had
turned upside down and the corn had all fallen off into the sky."

"There’s matter enough," said Gray Hen.  "What have we fowls to live
for?  I scratch and you waddle and you waddle and I scratch, and what
does it all amount to?  Something has got to be done, and, if no one
else will do it, why, I shall.  Things are going to be different with
me."

"I guess I’ll keep on as I am," said old Daddy Gander as he waddled
away.  "I might make them worse than they are, and they are not so bad,
anyway."

"Good morning, Gray Hen," said Madam Duck. "What a fine day we are going
to have!  The water will be nice and warm for my ducklings, and I can
give them a good swim in the pond."

"It is neither a good morning nor is it going to be a fine day, and as
for swimming in the pond, if I had to mother a lot of children with as
homely feet as your brood has I would want to keep them in the water all
the time so that no one would see them."

"What a mean disposition Gray Hen has!" said Madam Duck to the turkey
gobbler as she went on her way to the pond.  "I tried to be agreeable to
her and she insulted me and spoke so unkindly of my children that I felt
quite like crying."

"I almost wish that she had been a little more unkind," said the
gobbler, "for I have never seen a duck crying and I imagine it might be
an almost sight.  Perhaps Gray Hen needs some of my good advice, and I
will walk over shortly and see her."

But the old gobbler was saved his trouble, for in a few minutes he saw
Gray Hen coming down the path toward him.  As she came up to him he
said: "What a miserable feeling morning this, Mrs. Hen; my feathers will
none of them lie straight, and every worm that I have tasted for
breakfast has been bitter."

"You are quite right," said Gray Hen.  "It is just like all the mornings
recently, uncomfortable and disagreeable, and there does not seem to be
any promise of anything better."

"You are quite right," said the gobbler.  "What the gander and the duck
see in the present to be so satisfied with I don’t understand, and as to
the future, I don’t know why we should expect any more of that than the
past."

"I have always felt," said Gray Hen, "that you, Mr. Gobbler, never got
half your deserts in this barnyard.  Everybody seems to think that the
rooster, because he crows every morning at sunup, is the wisest bird in
the yard, but as for me, I have always held you in greater esteem and
have often spoken of the nobility of your looks and the regal way in
which you walk about the place.  If I had any voice in the matter I
should suggest that you be recognized as superior to the rooster.  But,
you see, the hens have nothing to say, although some day I feel sure
that it will be different."

"You are very kind," said the gobbler, "and I feel as you do, while I
have no wish to be ruler of the yard, that the hens should have more to
say.  You should at least have independence and do as you like."

"Oh, I have determined on that already," said Gray Hen, and she told him
how she had decided to lay no more eggs and to scratch as little as she
had to.

"Well," said the gobbler, "I must be off and see that none of those
turkey hens get so far into the wood that they cannot find their way
back again. I certainly gave the kind of advice she wanted," he said,
when he had got out of her hearing, "and that was easier than getting
into an argument.  And, besides that, discontented people and animals
are always so much more comfortable if they think others are just as
unhappy as they are."

Old Gray Hen, however, was as good as her word. She stopped laying eggs
and the amount of gravel that she scratched was scarcely worth
mentioning. She stole worms from the younger chickens, who were too
polite to punish a hen so old as she was, and, altogether, she became a
general nuisance to all the rest of the barnyard flock.

They could not protect themselves, but Farmer Johnson, walking through
the yard one day, noticed that the Old Gray Hen’s toes had grown to a
most unusual length.  "I guess she doesn’t do much scratching," he said
as he passed along, "and I suspect she doesn’t lay many eggs.  I must
ask mother about it when I get back to the house."

"No," said Mother Johnson, when he asked her, "I haven’t found an egg in
Gray Hen’s nest for a month or more."

"She won’t pay to winter, then," said Farmer Johnson.  "We had better
eat her."  And the following Sunday, when Farmer Johnson sat down for
dinner, they brought a big platter of steaming fricassee to the table
and that was the end of Old Gray Hen.

A day or two after, when the gobbler happened to meet Madam Duck, she
said: "I hear that Gray Hen has left us."

"Yes," said the gobbler, "and I hope she is happier than she was here,
but her contentment was greatest when others were distressed."




[Illustration: headpiece to The Worsted Doll]


                           *THE WORSTED DOLL*


Good Mother Munster and her husband Jacob had five daughters.  Of course
they loved them dearly, but they often wished for a son.

"Then he could help me in the shop," said Jacob, who was a maker of
dolls.  "Not that I would exchange one of our girls for a boy," he
added, "but I wish we had a son as well as the five girls."

Whether the stork heard this talk between Jacob and his wife and took
offense because they questioned his judgment, or whether he thought
Jacob and his wife had their number of children, I do not know; but he
never called again at their door and their daughters grew up to
womanhood without a brother.

One day Jacob hurried in from his shop, which was back of his house.  He
was very much excited, and talked so fast that good Mother Munster could
not understand half he said.

"They want worsted dolls," he explained at last, "two dozen worsted
dolls to be sent across the water in time for Christmas."

Jacob raised his hands with a gesture of despair, for at his shop they
did not make worsted dolls, and he could not understand why any one
should want them.

"There is plenty of time to make them," Mother Munster said.  "The girls
and I can knit them, and we will make half of them girls and half of
them boy dolls."  And so the knitted dolls were begun by good Mother
Munster and her daughters.

One day when Mother Munster was knitting on the last doll, which was a
boy, she began to think how much she would miss them when they were
finished and sent across the sea.

"I will make you extra large," she said as she added a few stitches to
the length and breadth of the doll, "and if I could I would knit you a
tongue so you could talk and legs that you could run on, and have you
like a live boy."

Mother Munster knitted as she thought, and though she did not know it,
she knitted all her wishes into the boy doll’s body, so that when he was
finished he could do all the things she had wished.

But he was a wise little fellow, and did not betray himself for fear he
would not be shipped across the water with the other dolls, and he
wanted to see the world.

It was a long journey to the other side of the ocean, and the boy doll
thought it never would end.  But by and by he was taken from the big
packing-case and with other dolls placed in a window of a big shop.

"I wish some one would speak to me," thought the boy doll, but not a
word did the other dolls utter, and as he did not wish to appear forward
he kept silent also.

One day a lady came into the store and carried Boy Doll away with her,
and then one night he was put on a tree trimmed with glittering ropes of
tinsel.

A little girl came into the room after a while, and when she saw Boy
Doll she exclaimed, "Oh, I hope the boy doll is for me!"

"So do I," thought Boy Doll, "for I am sure you will talk to me."

And sure enough he was given to the little girl. "I am so glad you were
for me," she told him, "for I do need a father for my doll family."

"Dear me," thought Boy Doll, "what a responsibility to be forced upon me
so suddenly!"  And not a word could he speak in reply to the little
girl, because he was so surprised.

The little girl took him into a large room, which was the home of her
doll family.

"This is your husband, Rosamond," she said to a large French doll, "and
his name is Theodore.  And this is your father," she told a group of
small dolls; "he has come to live with you.

"I hope you will be a good father to them," she said to Theodore.  But
Boy Doll was so overcome that his tongue clung to the roof of his mouth
and he was silent.

Theodore, as we may call him now, was placed in a large arm-chair, and
the little girl left him with his family.

His grand-looking wife held her head very high and cast a look of
disdain at poor Theodore, for she was not pleased to have a worsted doll
for a husband, and the children, following the example of their mother,
looked at their new father and giggled.

"Oh, why did I leave good Mother Munster?" thought Theodore.  "She
wanted a son and she would have loved me."

He sat very still for a while.  He was thinking what he should do; he
knew that as the father of a family he should be respected, and here
were his children laughing at him.

If it were not for the haughty French wife he might exert his authority,
but Theodore was a little afraid of her.

"I’ll begin with the children," he said at last, "and that may impress
Rosamond."

So while the children were giggling and whispering Theodore suddenly
jumped up from his chair.

Of course he was very stiff in his movements, as he did not have any
joints, and the children laughed out and said, "Our father hasn’t any
joints in his legs."

The stern look on Theodore’s face soon quieted them, however, and by the
time he reached them they were quite afraid.  Theodore cleared his
throat and put his hands behind him.

"It is very evident," he said, "that you need a father, for your manners
are shockingly bad.  What is your name?" he asked, taking one of them by
the shoulder.

"Etta," she answered.

"And yours?" he said, pointing to another.

"May," was the reply.

"And yours, and yours, and yours, and yours, and yours, and yours?" he
asked, receiving in turn the names of Sally, Freda, Maude, Cora, Dora,
and Ida.

"I shall divide you into two groups of four each," he said, after
hearing the names.  "One will be the Etta-May-Sally-Freda group, and the
other will be the Maude-Cora-Dora-Ida group.  That will simplify matters
for me, and I can talk to four at one time. Ettamaysallyfreda," he
called.

"Yes, father," answered all four at once.

"If I ever hear you giggle again as you did when I appeared I shall
punish you severely."

"Yes, sir," answered the trembling dolls.

"Maudecoradoraida," said Theodore, in a stern voice.

"Yes, father," answered the second group.

"If you behave again in the manner you did when I first came to this
house you will be punished in a way you will remember."

"Yes, sir," answered the four dolls.

Theodore turned away and with all the dignity he could muster walked
toward his wife.

Rosamond’s head was not held so high now, for her husband’s manner with
the children had shown her that he intended to be master in his home.

"When do we dine?" he asked.

"We have no regular hour," she answered.

"We will dine at seven," said Theodore; "breakfast at eight; the hour
for lunch you may please yourself about, as I shall not be here.  The
children will not dine with us," he added.  "And now I should like to
see my room."

Rosamond, who was as completely subdued as the children, very meekly did
as she was told, and Theodore found himself master without any further
trouble.

But he could not forget good Mother Munster, and while he knew he should
be content in the bosom of his family, he found his thoughts often with
Mother Munster, across the water.

It was not an easy matter being the father of a family.  If he felt like
jumping or lying on the floor, there were the children, and he must not
lose his dignity for a moment.  "I would rather be a son," he said,
"than be the father of a family.  If I could get back to Germany and
good Mother Munster I should be quite happy."

Of course this was not the proper feeling for a husband and father to
have, but you must remember that Theodore had all this thrust upon him
before he had any of the joys of boyhood.

One day he heard the family where he lived talking about going abroad,
and saw the big trunks being packed.

"Oh dear," thought Theodore, "I wonder if they will take me with them.
Perhaps they will go to Germany where the good Mother Munster lives."

And then Theodore thought a very wicked thought. "I will get into one of
the trunks and hide," he said, "and if I can find the German village
where Mother Munster lives I will not come back to be the father of a
family, but I will stay with good Mother Munster and be her little boy."

Of course that was deserting his family, but Theodore did not know
anything about how wrong that was, and so one day when he was left alone
in the room with the trunks he climbed over the side of one of them and
hid himself between the folds of a dress, without saying good-by to his
wife or children.

Theodore did not feel safe until the men came for the trunks, and then
his heart leaped for joy.  After a long time the trunks were opened in a
hotel, and Theodore wondered what they would say when they found him.

"Here is Theodore," said the mother to her little girl, when she found
him inside her dresses.  "I wonder how he got in my trunk."

The little girl had not brought any of her dolls and she was so pleased
to see Theodore that she hugged him.

Theodore felt guilty when he thought of what he intended to do, but his
love for Mother Munster was deeper than that for his family.

After many weeks of visiting different places, Theodore had almost given
up hope of seeing Mother Munster again, when one day he heard them say,
"We will go to Berlin to-morrow."

"Berlin, Berlin," repeated Theodore.  "Where have I heard that name
before?"  Then all at once it came to him that it was in Germany and
that not far from there was the village where Mother Munster lived.

He could hardly keep from jumping for joy.

One morning after they had been in Berlin for a week the father of the
little girl said, "We are to visit a little village to-day where they
make dolls."

"I will take Theodore," said the little girl, "for I want to get a girl
doll just like him."

They rode quite a distance on the train, and then in a carriage, and
stopped at a house that made Theodore’s heart thump so loudly that he
feared they would hear it, for the house was the home of good Mother
Munster, and there standing in the doorway was the dear old lady
herself.

They went into the kitchen and the little girl put Theodore on a chest
which stood in the room.

In the excitement of seeing the doll-shop she forgot to take him with
her, and as soon as Theodore found himself alone he slipped off the
chest and hid behind it.

When the little girl came back from the shop she had a large doll in her
arms and she quite forgot Theodore.

A few days after, when Mother Munster was cleaning her kitchen, she
moved the chest, and there was Theodore with his arms stretched up
toward her.

Mother Munster picked him up.  "Why, it is my boy!" she said.  "How ever
did you get here?" she asked.  Then she thought of the little girl.  "I
hope she does not send for you," she said, and she held Theodore tightly
in her arms.

"So do I," said Theodore, and although he did not speak out loud Mother
Munster seemed to understand.

"You’d rather live here, hadn’t you?" she asked. "I will put you on this
seat in the corner and you shall be my little boy.  All the girls have
gone to homes of their own, and Jacob and I are very lonely.

"Look, Jacob," she said as he came in the door, "here is the worsted
doll I made to send across the water.  He has come back to live with us,
and so at last we have a son."

Jacob smiled.  He didn’t think much of worsted dolls, but he took
Theodore by one hand.  "You have traveled a long distance, son," he
said, "since you left here, and can tell Mother Munster and me all about
what you have seen as we three sit by the fire in the long winter
evenings."  And so Theodore found a mother and father and lived a happy
and peaceful life undisturbed by the cares of a family.

But sometimes he dreams and awakens himself by calling,
"Ettamaysallyfreda," or "Maudecoradoraida."  And when he makes sure it
is only a dream he turns over and goes to sleep again with a smile of
contentment on his face which plainly says, "Theodore, you are a lucky
man."